THE

MONTESSORI
TODDLER
A PA R E N T ’ S G U I D E T O R A I S I N G
A CURIOUS AND RESPONSIBLE HUMAN BEING

S I M O N E DAV I E S

I L L U S T R AT E D B Y

H I YO KO I M A I

WO R K M A N P U B L I S H I N G | N E W YO R K

Copyright © 2019 by Jacaranda Tree Montessori
Illustration copyright © 2019 by Hiyoko Imai
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced—
mechanically, electronically, or by any other means, including
photocopying—without written permission of the publisher. Published
simultaneously in Canada by Thomas Allen & Son Limited.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN 978-1-5235-0689-7
Design and illustrations by Hiyoko Imai
Author photo by Rubianca Han Simmelsgaard
Editing assistance by Alexis Wilson Briggs, alphaomegaconsulting.nl
Workman books are available at special discounts when purchased in
bulk for premiums and sales promotions as well as for fund-raising or
educational use. Special editions or book excerpts can also be created to
specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Director at the address
below, or send an email to specialmarkets@workman.com.
Feelings and Needs chart reprinted with permission by Yoram Mosenzon,
connecting2life.net
Workman Publishing Co., Inc.
225 Varick Street
New York, NY 10014-4381
workman.com
themontessorinotebook.com
hiyokoimai.com
WORKMAN is a registered trademark of Workman Publishing Co., Inc.
Printed in the United States of America
First printing February 2019
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is for Oliver and Emma.
I feel honored to be your mother.
You inspire me every day.

CO NTE NTS
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION

02	Let’s change the way we see toddlers
04	Why I love toddlers
06	What we need to know about toddlers
08	Parenting the Montessori toddler
10	Getting the most out of this book

C H A P T E R T WO
INTRODUCTION TO MONTESSORI

12	A brief history of Montessori
13	Traditional education vs Montessori
education
14	Some Montessori principles

CHAPTER THREE

CHAPTER FIVE

M O NTE S SO R I AC TIVITI E S FO R

RAISING A CURIOUS CHILD

TODDLERS

WHO FEELS SEEN AND HEARD

24

Montessori activities for the whole child

25	What makes an activity Montessori?
26	How to show the child an activity
27	General principles to keep in mind
31	How to set up an activity
34	Types of activities
34	Eye-hand coordination
37	Music and movement
39	Practical life
44	Arts and crafts
46	Language

60	An extra note on the outdoors and nature
62	What about non-Montessori toys?

PA R T O N E

EN CO U R AG I N G CU R I O S IT Y I N O U R C H I LD

86	Five ingredients for curiosity
86	Trust in the child
87	A rich learning environment
87	Time
87	A safe and secure base
88	Fostering a sense of wonder

88	Seven principles for curious humans
88	Follow the child
89	Encourage hands-on learning
90	Include the child in daily life
91	Go slow
92	Help me to help myself

CHAPTER FOUR
SETTING UP THE HOME

94	Encourage creativity
96

Observation

PA R T T WO

66	Setting up Montessori-style spaces

ACC EPTI N G O U R C H I LD

67	Room by room

FOR WHO THEY ARE

67	Entrance
67	Living room
68	Kitchen
69

Eating area

69	Bedroom
70	Bathroom
70	Arts and crafts area
71	Cozy place for reading
71	Outside

73	General principles to keep in mind
73	Tackling the clutter
74	Making it cozy
74	Setting up our home to save us work
75	Sharing spaces
75	Small spaces

76	The importance of the home environment
78	Home tour

99	Give toddlers significance, belonging, and
acceptance for who they are
100	Be their translator
101	Allow all feelings, but not all behavior
102	Give our child feedback instead of praise
104	Roles and labels

CHAPTER SIX

CHAPTER SEVEN

N U R T U R I N G C O O P E R AT I O N A N D

PUT TI N G IT I NTO PR AC TI C E

RESPONSIBILITY IN OUR CHILD
PA R T O N E

C U LT I VAT I N G C O O P E R AT I O N

108	Why the Montessori approach does not use
threats, bribes, or punishments

PA R T O N E

D A I LY C A R E

136	Daily rhythm
138	Rituals
139	Getting dressed and leaving the house

110	Problem solving with our toddlers

143	Eating

113	Ways to involve our child

147	Sleeping

114	How we can talk to help them listen

150	Brushing teeth

116	Managing expectations
118	Bonus—Write a note

PA R T T WO

DEALING WITH CHANGES
PA R T T WO

SETTING LIMITS

120	It’s okay to set limits

151	Toileting
154	Saying goodbye to pacifiers
155	Siblings

121	Be clear on the limits
122	Follow through with kind and clear action

PA R T T H R E E

125	Acknowledge negative feelings

USEFUL SKILLS FOR OUR

126	Dealing with tantrums

TO D D L E R S TO L E A R N

128	Reconnecting once they are calm
128	Helping them make amends
130	Tips for setting limits
133	A handy checklist for limits

161	Sharing
162	Learning how to interrupt an adult
163	Skills for introverted toddlers
165	A hitting/biting/pushing/throwing phase
168	Building concentration
169	Dealing with frustration
170	When our child is clingy
172	Screen time
173	Bilingualism

CHAPTER EIGHT

R E A L S TO R I E S

B E I N G T H E A D U LT

HOME TOURS AND QUOTES FROM

178

Preparation of the adult

179	Physical self-care

M O N T E S S O R I FA M I LI E S

212	Australia

180	Cultivate a learning mind-set

Kylie, Aaron, Caspar, Otis, and Otto

180	Start and end the day right
182	Practice presence

How We Montessori

213	Mongolia

183	Observation

Enerel, Bayanaa, Nimo, and Odi

183	Fill our emotional bucket and our child’s

Mininimoo

184

Slow down

214	Canada

186	Be the child’s guide

Beth, Anthony, and Quentin

187	Use our home as a helper
188	Be honest

Our Montessori Life

215	USA

188	Take responsibility for our life and choices

Amy, James, Charlotte, and Simon

189	Learn from our mistakes
190	Celebrate where we are

Midwest Montessori

216	My family

190	Self-awareness

Simone, Oliver, and Emma

191	Keep practicing

Australia and the Netherlands

217	My classroom
Jacaranda Tree Montessori
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

CHAPTER NINE
WORKING TOGETHER

194	What about everyone else?
195	Parents are people, too
195	Preferring one parent
196	The key to working together as a family
197	Getting family on board
199	Grandparents and caregivers
200	When there is conflict in the family
201

D ivorce does not have to be a dirty word

218

FURTHER READING

220	
THANK-YOUS
APPENDIX

224	Instead of this, say that
226	Where to find Montessori materials and
furniture
228	About Montessori schools
228	What to look for in a Montessori school
229	What does a typical day at a Montessori

CHAPTER TEN

school look like?
230	Is Montessori suitable for every child?

W H AT ’ S N E X T

231	How does a child transition to a

204	Getting ready for preschool/school

traditional school after being at

205	The coming years

Montessori?

209	It’s time for a change in education

232	Feelings and needs

209	It’s time for peace

234	Play-dough recipe
235	List of Montessori activities for toddlers
246

Index

I NTRO D U C TI O N

1

02	Let's change the way we see toddlers
04	Why I love toddlers
06	What we need to know about toddlers
08	Parenting the Montessori toddler
10	Getting the most out of this book

2

LET ’ S C H A N G E
TH E WAY W E S E E TO D D LE R S

Toddlers are misunderstood humans. People see toddlers as difficult. There are not many
good examples of how to be with toddlers in a loving, patient, supportive way.
They start to walk, they start to explore, they’re only just learning to communicate with
words, and they don’t have a whole lot of impulse control. They can’t sit still easily in
cafes and restaurants, they see an open space and start running, they have tantrums
(often at the most inconvenient times and in the most inconvenient places), and they
touch anything that looks interesting.
They get called “the terrible twos.” They do not listen. They keep throwing everything.
They won’t sleep/eat/use the toilet.
When my children were small, it didn’t feel right to get their cooperation with threats,
bribes, and time-outs, yet it was difficult to find alternatives.
I heard a radio interview when my first child was very young. The guest talked about the
negative effects of using time-outs as a punishment—it alienated the child when they
needed support and made the child upset with the adult rather than helping the child
make amends. I listened attentively for the guest to tell parents what to do instead, but
the radio interview ended there. It’s been my mission since then to find my own answers.
I entered a Montessori school for the first time as a new parent and instantly fell in love.
The environment was so carefully prepared and inviting. The teachers were approachable
and spoke to our baby (and us) with respect. We put our names on the waiting list for
the school and joined the parent-toddler classes.
I learned so much about the Montessori approach in these classes and about toddlers.
Toddlers thrive in an environment that challenges them; they seek to be understood,
and they take in the world around them like sponges. I realized that I related easily to

3

toddlers—I could see their perspective, and the way they learned fascinated me. I was
lucky to start working as Ferne van Zyl’s assistant in this classroom.
I did my Montessori training with the Association Montessori Internationale in 2004,
and when life took us from Sydney to Amsterdam, I was surprised there weren’t any
Montessori parent-child classes in our new city. So I soon started my own school—
Jacaranda Tree Montessori—where I lead parent-child classes, helping families see
their toddler in a new way and helping them incorporate the Montessori approach
in their homes.
I continue to love learning from the nearly one thousand toddlers and parents I’ve seen
over the many years running these classes. I’ve participated in Positive Discipline teacher
training and learned Nonviolent Communication. I continue to read innumerable books
and articles, speak to teachers and parents, and listen to radio programs and podcasts.
And I’ve learned from my own children, who have grown from toddlers to teenagers.
I want to share with you what I have learned. I want to translate the wisdom of
Montessori into simple language that is easy to understand and that you can apply in
your own home. By picking up this book, you have taken a step in your own journey
toward finding another way to be with your toddler, whether or not your child will
attend a Montessori school.
You will get the tools to work together with your child, to lead them, and to support
them, especially when they are having a hard time. You’ll learn how to set up your home
to get rid of the chaos and to bring some calm to your family’s life. To set up a “yes”
space for your child to freely explore. And you’ll discover how to create Montessori
activities at home that are just right for toddlers.
This will not happen in one day. And you are not trying to re-create a Montessori
classroom. You can start small—work with what you already have, put away some of the
toys you already have so that you can rotate them, start to really observe the children as
they follow their interests—and gradually you’ll find yourself incorporating more and
more Montessori ideas into your home and daily life.
I hope to show you that there is another, more peaceful way to be with your toddler.
To help you plant the seeds to raise a curious and responsible human being. To work
on a relationship with your child that you will continue to build upon for years. To put
Dr. Montessori’s philosophies into practice every day.
It’s time for us to learn how to see through our toddler’s eyes.

4

W H Y I LOV E TO D D LE R S
Most Montessori teachers have a favorite age to work with. For me it is working with my
toddler friends. People are often confused by this preference. Toddlers can be hard work,
they are emotional, and they do not always listen to us.
I want to paint a new picture of the toddler.
Toddlers live in the present moment. Walking down the street with a toddler can be
a delight. While we make lists in our heads of the errands we need to run and what we
need to cook for dinner, they remain present and spot the weeds growing up from a
crack in the pavement.
When we spend time with a toddler, they show us how to be present. They are focused
on the here and now.
Toddlers pick things up effortlessly. Dr. Montessori observed that children under
6 years old take in everything without effort, just as a sponge soaks up water. She
referred to this as the absorbent mind.
We don’t have to sit down with a 1-year-old and teach them grammar or sentence
structure. By the age of 3 they already have an amazing vocabulary and are learning
how to construct simple sentences (and, for some, complicated paragraphs). Compare
this with learning a language as an adult—it takes a lot of effort and work.
Toddlers are enormously capable. Often it is not until we have our own child that we
realize how enormously capable they are from such a young age. As they approach
18 months old, they might start to notice that we are heading to Grandma’s house well
before we are there by recognizing things along the route. When they see an elephant in
a book, they’ll run over to find a toy elephant in a basket.
When we set up our homes to make them more accessible to our young children,
they take on tasks with eagerness, capability, and delight. They wipe up spills, fetch a
diaper for the baby, put their trash in the wastebasket, help us make food, and like to
dress themselves.

5

One day a repairman came to fix something in our home. I’ll never forget the look on his
face when my daughter (then just under 2 years old) walked past him on the way to the
bedroom, changed her clothes, put some wet clothes in the hamper, and walked off to
play. Clearly he was surprised to see how much she was capable of doing for herself.
Toddlers are innocent. I don’t think any toddler has a mean bone in their body. If they
see someone playing with a toy, they may simply think, I’d like to play with that toy right
now and take it from the other child. They may do something to get a reaction (Let’s drop
this cup and see my parent’s reaction) or be frustrated that something did not go their way.
But they are not mean-spirited, spiteful, or vengeful. They are simply impulsive,
following their every urge.
Toddlers do not hold grudges. Picture a toddler who wants to stay at the park when it’s
time to leave. They melt down. The tantrum may even last half an hour. But once they
calm down (sometimes with help), they go back to being their cheerful, curious selves—
unlike adults, who can wake up on the wrong side of the bed and be cranky all day.
Toddlers are also amazingly forgiving. Sometimes we do the wrong thing—we lose
our temper, we forget a promise we made, or we just feel a bit out of sorts. When we
apologize to our toddler, we are modeling how to make amends with someone, and they
are quite likely to give us a big hug or surprise us with an especially kind word. When we
have that solid base with our children, they look after us, just as we look after them.
Toddlers are authentic. I love spending time with toddlers because they are direct and
honest. Their authenticity is infectious. They say what they mean. They wear their hearts
on their sleeves.
Everyone who has spent time with a toddler knows they will point to someone on the
bus and say loudly, “That person has no hair.” We may sink down in our seat while our
child shows no signs of embarrassment.
That same directness makes them very easy to be around. There are no mind games being
played, no underlying motives, no politics at play.
They know how to be themselves. They don’t doubt themselves. They do not judge others.
We would do well to learn from them.
Note: When I refer to toddlers, I’m talking about children from around 1 to 3 years old.

6

W H AT W E N E E D TO K N OW
A B O UT TO D D LE R S
Toddlers need to say “no.” One of the most important developmental phases a toddler
passes through is the “crisis of self-affirmation.” Between 18 months and 3 years,
children realize that their identity is separate from their parents’ and they begin to
desire more autonomy. At the same time they begin to say “no,” they begin to use the
personal pronoun I.
This movement toward independence does not come easily. Some days they will push us
away, wanting to do everything by themselves; other days they will refuse to do anything
at all or will cling to us.
Toddlers need to move. Just as an animal does not like to be caged, our toddlers will not
sit still for long. They want to keep mastering movement. Once standing, they move on
to climbing and walking. Once walking, they want to run and to move heavy objects—
the heavier the better. There is even a name for the desire to challenge themselves to the
highest level by, for example, carrying big objects or moving heavy bags and furniture:
maximum effort.
Toddlers need to explore and discover the world around them. The Montessori
approach recommends that we accept this, set up our spaces for our child to safely
explore, get them involved in daily life activities that involve all their senses, and allow
them to explore the outdoors. Let them dig in the dirt, take off their shoes in the grass,
splash in the water, and run in the rain.
Toddlers need freedom. This freedom will help them grow to be curious learners, to
experience things for themselves, to make discoveries, and to feel they have control over
themselves.
Toddlers need limits. These limits will keep them safe, teach them to respect others
and their environment, and help them become responsible human beings. Limits also
help the adult step in before a boundary has been crossed to avoid the all-too-familiar
shouting, anger, and blame. The Montessori approach is neither permissive nor bossy.
Instead, it teaches parents to be calm leaders for our children.
Toddlers need order and consistency. Toddlers prefer things to be exactly the same
every day—the same routine, things in the same place, and the same rules. It helps them
understand, make sense of their world, and know what to expect.

7

When limits are not consistent, toddlers will keep testing them to see what we decide
today. If they find it works to nag or melt down, they will try again. This is called
intermittent reinforcement.
If we understand this need, we can have more patience, more understanding. And when
we aren’t able to provide the same thing every day, we will be able to anticipate that they
may need additional support. We won’t think they are being silly; we’ll be able to see
from their perspective that it’s not the way they were hoping it would be. We can offer
them help to calm down and, once they’re calm, help them find a solution.
Toddlers are not giving us a hard time. They are having a hard time. I love this idea
(attributed to educator Jean Rosenberg in the New York Times article “Seeing Tantrums
as Distress, Not Defiance”). When we realize their difficult behavior is actually a cry
for help, we can ask ourselves, How can I be of help right now? We move from feeling
attacked to searching for a way to be supportive.
Toddlers are impulsive. Their prefrontal cortex (the part of the brain that houses our
self-control and decision-making centers) is still developing (and will be for another
twenty years). This means we may need to guide them if they are climbing on the table
again or grabbing something out of someone’s hands, and be patient if they become
emotional. I like to say, “We need to be their prefrontal cortex.”
Toddlers need time to process what we are saying. Instead of repeatedly telling our
child to put on their shoes, we can count to ten in our head to allow them time to
process our request. Often, by the time we get to eight, we’ll see them start to respond.
Toddlers need to communicate. Our children try to communicate with us in many
ways. Babies gurgle and we can gurgle back; young toddlers will babble and we can show
an interest in what they are saying; older toddlers love asking and answering questions;
and we can give rich language, even to these young children, to absorb like a sponge.
Toddlers love mastery. Toddlers love to repeat skills until they master them. Observe
them and notice what they are working to master. Usually it is something hard enough
to be challenging but not so difficult that they give up. They’ll repeat and repeat the
process until they perfect it. Once they’ve mastered it, they move on.
Toddlers like to contribute and be part of the family. They seem to be more interested
in the objects their parents use than they are in their toys. They really like to work
alongside us as we prepare food, do the laundry, get ready for visitors, and the like. When
we allow more time, set things up for success, and lower our expectations of the outcome,
we teach our young child a lot about being a contributing member of the family. These are
things that they will build on as they become schoolchildren and teenagers.

8

PA R E NTI N G
TH E M O NTE S SO R I TO D D LE R
When I first came to Montessori, I confess, my interest might have been considered
superficial. I was attracted to the Montessori environments and activities. And I wanted
to provide beautiful, engaging materials and spaces for my own children. I was not
wrong. It’s the easiest place to start.
Years later, I see that Montessori really is a way of life. Even more than the activities or
the spaces, Montessori has influenced the way I am with my children, the children who
come to my classes, and the children I come in contact with in my daily life. It’s about
encouraging a child’s curiosity, learning to really see and accept a child as they are,
without judgment, and remaining connected with the child, even when we need to stop
them from doing something they really want to do.
It’s not difficult to apply Montessori practices at home, but it may be quite different from
the way we were parented and the way others around us parent.
In a Montessori approach, we see the child as their own person on their own unique
path. We support them as their guide and gentle leader. They aren’t something to be
molded into what we see as their potential or to make up for our own experiences or
unfulfilled desires as a child.
As a gardener, we plant seeds, provide the right conditions, and give enough food,
water, and light. We observe the seeds and adjust our care if needed. And we let them
grow. This is how we can parent our children, too. This is the Montessori way. We
are planting the seeds that are our toddlers, providing the right conditions for them,
adjusting when needed, and watching them grow. The direction their lives take will be
of their own making.
“[T]he educators [including parents] behave as do good
gardeners and cultivators toward their plants.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, The Formation of Man

9

TO D D LE R S

What seems to be a lack of flexibility

ARE

favorite spoon!”) IS ACTUALLY

B R I LLIA NT

What looks like a battle of wills
IS ACTUALLY your toddler learning

that things don’t always go their way.

What appears to be an explosive
tantrum IS ACTUALLY the toddler
saying, “I love you so much, I feel
safe to release everything that I’ve
been holding on to all day.”

What can be super embarrassing
to hear a toddler say in public
IS ACTUALLY the child’s inability

to lie, a model of honesty.

(“I can’t eat breakfast without my
an expression of their strong sense
of order.

What looks like repeating the same
annoying game over and over
IS ACTUALLY the child trying to

gain mastery.

What seems to be intentionally going
slowly to wind us up IS ACTUALLY
them exploring everything in
their path.

What seems like another night of
interrupted sleep IS ACTUALLY
chubby little arms giving you a big
squeeze in the middle of the night
to express their pure love for you.

10

G ET TI N G TH E M O ST
O UT O F TH I S B OO K

You can read this book from cover to cover. Or just open it at a page that interests you
and find something practical that you can use today.
Sometimes figuring out where to start can be overwhelming. To help make it more
manageable, I’ve included key questions at the end of each chapter to help you begin
to incorporate Montessori into your home and daily life. There are boxes and lists
throughout the book for easy reference. You will also find a useful chart in the appendix
titled “Instead of This, Say That.” You may wish to copy it and hang it somewhere as
a reminder.
In addition to all of the Montessori wisdom, I also draw on many of the resources
(books, podcasts, training courses) I have discovered over the years that complement
the Montessori approach and help me be a kind and clear guide for the toddlers in my
classes and for my own children.
Use this book as inspiration. In the end, the goal is not to do every single activity, or
have a completely clutter-free space, or be a perfect parent; it is learning how to see and
support our toddlers. To have fun being with them. To help them when they are having
a hard time. And to remember to smile when we start taking it all too seriously. It’s a
journey, not a destination.

I NTRO D U C TI O N
TO M O NTE S SO R I

2

12	A brief history of Montessori
13	Traditional education vs Montessori education
14	Some Montessori principles

12

A B R I E F H I STO RY O F M O NTE S SO R I
Dr. Maria Montessori was one of the first female doctors in Italy in the late 1800s. She
worked at a clinic in Rome, tending to the poor and their children. She not only treated
her patients’ health but also provided them with care and clothing.
In an asylum in Rome, she observed children with emotional and mental disabilities
who were sensorially deprived in their environment. In one case, she noticed that they
were picking up crumbs—not to eat, but to stimulate their sense of touch. She proposed
that education, not medicine, was the answer for these children.
Dr. Montessori did not begin with any preconceived methodology. Instead, she applied
the same objective and scientific observation practices from her medical training to see
what engaged the children, to understand how they learned and how she could facilitate
their learning.
She immersed herself in educational philosophy, psychology, and anthropology,
experimenting with and refining educational materials for these children. Eventually,
the majority of the children passed state examinations with marks higher than children
without disabilities. Dr. Montessori was hailed as a miracle worker.
She was soon able to test her ideas in the Italian educational system when she was
invited to set up a place in the slums of Rome to care for young children while their
parents worked. This was the first Casa dei Bambini—House of Children—which opened
in January 1907.
It was not long before her work drew interest and spread internationally. Montessori
schools and training programs are now on every continent except Antarctica. In the
United States alone, there are more than 4,500 Montessori schools, and there are 20,000
worldwide. Where I live in Amsterdam, there are more than 20 Montessori schools for
a population of around 800,000 catering to children from infancy to 18 years old. Larry
Page and Sergey Brin (founders of Google), Jeff Bezos (founder of Amazon), Jacqueline
Kennedy Onassis (former first lady), and Gabriel García Márquez (Nobel Prize–winning
novelist) all attended Montessori schools.
Dr. Montessori continued to work in education and develop her ideas for children of all
ages as she moved around the world—including living in India in exile during World
War II—until her death in 1952 in the Netherlands. She called her work “an education
for life”—i.e., not just for the classroom, but for our daily lives.

13

TR AD ITI O NAL E D U CATI O N vs M O NTE S SO R I E D U CATI O N
In traditional education, the teacher generally stands at the front of the classroom,
decides what the children need to learn, and teaches the children what they need to
know: a top-down approach.
It is also a one-size-fits-all approach. The teacher decides that everyone is ready to learn,
for example, the letter a on the same day.

A D U LT

CHILD

TRADITIONAL

CHILD

ENVIRONMENT

A D U LT

MONTESSORI

In Montessori education there is a dynamic relationship between the child, the adult,
and the learning environment. The child is in charge of their own learning, supported
by the adult and the environment.
The materials are laid out on shelves in a sequential order from easiest to hardest.
Each child works at their own pace through the materials, following their interest in
that moment. The teacher will observe the child and when it seems that the child has
mastered the material, the teacher will then give them a lesson with the next material.
In the diagram of Montessori education above, the arrows are pointing in both
directions. The environment and child interact with each other. The environment
attracts the child and the child learns from the materials in the environment. The adult
and environment are also affecting each other. The adult prepares the environment,
observes, and makes adjustments where necessary to meet the child’s needs. And the
adult and child have a dynamic relationship, based on mutual respect for each other.
The adult will observe the child and step in to give only as much assistance as necessary
before stepping out of the way for the child to continue their self-mastery.

14

In her writing, Dr. Montessori reiterates that the objective of Montessori education is
not to fill a child with facts, but to cultivate their own natural desire to learn.
These principles do not just apply in the classroom—they inform the way we are with
our children in the home. We support our children to make discoveries for themselves,
we give them freedom and limits, and we enable success by setting up our homes so they
can take part in our daily lives.

SO M E M O NTE S SO R I P R I N C I P LE S
1. Prepared environment
I run eight classes a week at Jacaranda Tree Montessori. Much of my “work” is done
before the children arrive. I prepare the environment with a lot of care and attention.
•• I set up activities that are just the right level for the children—challenging to master
but not so difficult that they will give up.
•• I make sure the children have the tools they need to succeed—I look for trays they
can carry, cloths at the ready to wipe up spills, a supply of art materials so they can
practice and repeat, child-sized implements like spreaders for putting toppings onto
crackers, and the smallest of glasses for drinking.
•• I sit on the floor to see what it looks like from their height. I place artwork for them to
enjoy low on the walls and plants for them to look after on the floor or on low tables.
•• I prepare the space so it is simple and beautiful. I remove any clutter, I set out a few,
well-chosen activities, and I make sure that activities are complete and not missing
any parts so the children can work with them independently.
This never feels like “cleaning the classroom.” The purpose of this preparation is to make
things as attractive to them as possible and to allow the children freedom to explore and
learn.
A prepared environment can be any space that we set up for our children: a classroom,
our home, a holiday rental, an outside space.

15

2. Natural desire to learn
Dr. Montessori recognized that children have an intrinsic motivation to learn. Babies
learn to grasp for an object, they learn to stand by trying again and again and again,
and they master walking—all by themselves, within a supportive environment. The
same applies to learning to talk, learning to read and write, learning mathematics, and
learning about the world around them.
The discoveries children make for themselves—particularly within a prepared
environment—build wonder in the child and a love of learning. They do not need to be
directed to explore the environment.
In a Montessori classroom, the ages of the children are mixed. Younger children can
learn from observing older children, and older children can consolidate their learning
by helping the younger ones.
A toddler’s work is play. They are intrinsically curious learners—if we allow them to be.

3. Hands-on, concrete learning
“We may put it like this: the child’s intelligence can develop to a certain
level without the help of the hand. But if it develops with his hand, then the
level it reaches is higher, and the child’s character is stronger.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, The Absorbent Mind

The hand takes in information in a concrete way to pass on to the brain. It’s one thing to
hear or watch something, but we learn on a deeper level when we integrate our listening
or watching with using our hands. We move from passively learning to actively learning.
The materials in a Montessori classroom are so beautifully prepared and attractive that
the child is drawn to them to make discoveries for themselves, with their hands.
We give toddlers tactile learning experiences. They hold an object as we name it, we offer
a variety of beautiful art materials for them to explore, we provide interesting fastenings
to open and close (from Velcro to zippers to buttons), and they help us prepare food in
the kitchen—digging their fingers into the dough or using a butter knife to cut a banana.

16

Another example of hands-on learning is the math materials found in a Montessori
classroom for 3-to-6-year-olds. A small golden bead represents 1. A string of 10 beads
represents 10. A mat of 10 rows of 10 beads represents 100. A stack of 10 mats represents
1,000.
Using these materials, a young child can then do addition. For the sum 1,234 + 6,432,
the child can go and get one 1,000 block, 2 mats for 100, 3 strings for 30, and 4 single
beads. They can then do the same for 6,432. It is then very clear when they start adding
that there are now 7 of the 1,000 blocks, 6 of the 100 mats, and so on. The child can
concretely see and hold in their hands these values, unlike the abstract way in which
most children learn addition on a piece of paper.
As the child moves into the upper elementary grades, they will be able to draw on this
concrete base to move to abstraction. They will not need the materials, yet they are
always available to them should they wish to revisit them.

4. Sensitive periods
When a child shows a particular interest in one area—for example, movement, language,
math, reading—it is known as a sensitive period. This describes a moment when the child
is particularly attuned to learning a certain skill or concept and it happens with ease and
without effort.
We can watch our children to see what sensitive periods they are in and provide
appropriate activities to encourage those interests.
When the toddler starts to mimic us—parroting certain words—we know they are in
a sensitive period for language, and we can focus on giving the child new and familiar
vocabulary for them to practice.
If a toddler is interested in climbing on the table, they are likely in a sensitive period
for movement and need to practice those skills. Instead of allowing them to climb on
furniture, we can create an obstacle course with pillows, blankets, things to balance on,
and things to climb.
The table on the following page provides some examples of how we can feed our child’s
interest when they are in a sensitive period.
Note: Some people are worried that if they miss a sensitive period—for example, for
reading—then the child will have problems learning to read. They will learn to read, but
it will take more conscious effort, similar to an adult learning a foreign language.

17

S E N S ITIV E P E R I O D S FO R TO D D LE R S
The exact timing of these sensitive periods is unique to each child.

LANGUAGE

A sensitive period for spoken language. They watch our mouth, they babble,
they start parroting what we say, and soon afterward, there is a language
explosion. An interest in writing may begin from 3.5+ years; reading from
4.5+ years.
• Use rich language.
• Name everything with its proper name.
• Read books.
• Have conversations with the toddler—allow pauses for them to react.
• Follow the child’s interests.

ORDER

Toddlers love order. Dr. Montessori observed a child out walking with her
mother, who became very upset when her mother took off her coat. The
child was upset because the “order” (how things were) changed and, when
the mother replaced the coat, the child calmed down.
• Use routines so the child knows what to expect next.
• Have “a place for everything and everything in its place.”
• Provide understanding if the child is upset when something doesn’t
happen the same way every day.

TINY DETAIL

From 18 months to 3 years, the child is attracted to the smallest objects and
the minutest detail.
• Provide exquisite details in the home: art, flowers, handmade crafts.
• Sit on the ground at their height to see what they can see from their
perspective—make it attractive.
• We can remove imperfect items.

MOVEMENT
ACQUISITION

The young toddler acquires gross- and fine-motor movement—they learn to
walk and to use their hands. The older toddler refines these skills and begins
to develop more coordination.
• Offer different opportunities for them to practice gross- and fine-motor
movements.
• Allow time for movement.

SENSORIAL
EXPLORATION

Toddlers are fascinated by color, taste, smells, touch, and sounds through
exploration of the environment. The older toddler begins to classify and
organize these impressions.
• Give access to a rich indoor and outdoor environment to be explored
with all the senses.
• Provide time to explore freely.
• Make discoveries together.

MANNERS AND
COURTESIES

The sensitive period for manners starts around 2.5 years. Before this, the
adult can model manners and courtesies for young toddlers, who will absorb
them.
• Trust in the child that these manners and courtesies will gradually
develop without haranguing the child to use them.
• Model manners and courtesies in the home, in daily life, and with
strangers.

18

5. Unconscious absorbent mind
From birth until about the age of 6, children take in information effortlessly.
Dr. Montessori referred to this as the absorbent mind. From birth to the age of 3,
they do this completely unconsciously.
The ease with which a toddler learns gives us opportunities as well as responsibilities.
Opportunities because they absorb with such ease the language around them (building
a rich vocabulary and understanding), how we handle furniture and objects (ideally
with care), how we treat others (ideally with respect and kindness), where we put things
(creating order), and the beauty of the environment around them.
Responsibilities because, as Dr. Montessori points out, a sponge can absorb dirty water
as easily as it can clean water. A child will pick up negative experiences as easily as
positive experiences. They can even pick up our feelings and attitudes, for example,
when we drop something and get frustrated with ourselves (as opposed to forgiving
ourselves) or if we have a fixed mind-set that we are bad at drawing (as opposed to a
growth mind-set where we might show that we can always keep improving our skills).
We can therefore be mindful, as much as possible, to be positive role models for our
young children, to provide beauty, and to offer kindness for them to absorb.

6. Freedom and limits
I’ve heard people say, “Aren’t Montessori schools really hands-off and the children can
do whatever they like?” And I’ve heard others say, “Aren’t Montessori schools really
strict and the children are allowed to use materials only in certain ways?”
Montessori actually falls in the middle, somewhere between permissiveness and
autocracy/dictatorship.
At school or at home, we can have a few rules for children to live by to learn respect and
responsibility for themselves, others, and the environment around them. Within these
limits, children have freedom of choice, of movement, and of will.
In a Montessori school, the children have the freedom to choose what they would like
to work on (as long as it is available), the freedom to rest or to observe another child
(as long as they are not disturbing another child), and the freedom to move around the
classroom (as long as they respect the people around them). Within these limits, we
follow the child and trust they will develop on their own unique timeline.

19

At home, we can give them freedom to choose what they want to wear (as long as it’s
appropriate for the season), the freedom to make their own snack (as long as they sit
down to eat), and the freedom to express themselves (as long as they do not hurt others
or objects in the home).
Some people worry, How will they ever learn that there are some things they have to do?
or Won’t they become spoiled if we focus on them all the time? I am not suggesting that
we give our children license to do whatever they want. As parents we can be clear about
what is expected and follow through with loving limits when necessary. We will step in
if they are hurting someone or themselves, or we will gently help them leave the park if
they are having trouble leaving themselves. And while we are learning to see from their
perspective, we are also showing them how to have mutual respect and care for others
(including us, as their parents) and the environment.
We give them freedom within limits.

7. Independence and responsibility
“Help me to help myself.”
In Montessori, children learn to become remarkably independent. We don’t do this
so that children will grow up as fast as possible. (Let children be children.) We do this
because children love it.
Children want to be able to do more, to contribute, to be a part of the family/classroom/
society. We see satisfaction on their face when they pull on their own shoe, put
something back where it belongs, or help a friend. Peace washes over them when they
can do it for themselves, when they do not have to fight someone putting their T-shirt
over their head for them or plopping them into the bath without warning.
Through independence the child learns how to be responsible for caring for themselves,
others, and the environment.
They learn how to handle fragile things with care. They learn how to offer help to a
friend. They learn how to take care of their belongings. They learn how to make amends
when they have hurt someone. They learn how to look after the plants, the classroom,
and the environment around them.
Even toddlers.

20

8. Individual development
Each child is on their own unique developmental timeline.
Montessori respects not only each child’s unique timeline but also the fact that each
child has different energy levels and is able to focus at different moments. Children have
different modalities for learning—visual, aural, tactile, or a combination.
Some children like to repeat and repeat until they master a skill. Other children will
learn mostly through observing others. Some children need to move more than others.
Montessori respects how different children learn, and supports their individual
development.

9. Respect
A Montessori teacher will have such respect for the child that they will treat them the
same way they would an adult. We can see this in the way they speak to the child, the
way they ask permission if they need to touch them (for example, “Would it be okay for
me to lift you up?”), and the way they allow the child to develop in their own way.
This does not mean that the adult is not in charge. They will set a limit when needed.
Not passive. Not aggressive. But in a respectfully assertive way.

10. Observation
Observation is the basis of the Montessori approach. As part of my Montessori training,
we observed babies and young children for 250+ hours. We were training ourselves to
unlearn the desire to analyze, jump to conclusions, have biases, and form preconceptions
about a child or a situation.
Observing simply means watching like a camera on the wall. Being factual, and
recording only what we see: the children’s movements, their language, their posture,
their actions.
Observing shows us exactly where the child is right now. It helps us see what they are
interested in, what they are working to master, when there is a developmental change,
and, on occasion, when to step in to set a limit or to provide a little help before stepping
out again.

21

TO P R AC T I C E
1.	Do we see our child displaying any of the sensitive periods? What are they
showing interest in right now?
2.	Do we see examples in our child of:
• the absorbent mind?
• their natural desire to learn?
3.	How do we feel about top-down learning (a traditional learning approach)
versus an approach where the child is engaged in their own learning?

In the following chapters, I will show how to incorporate these Montessori principles
into daily life:
•• Observing our children to see what interests they have that they can explore and
make discoveries about for themselves
•• Providing time for language, movement, and being together
•• Setting up our home so they can be successful
•• Including them in daily life
•• Encouraging their curiosity
•• Setting a few ground/house rules so children know the limits
•• Being our children’s guide—because they don’t need a boss or a servant
•• Letting them blossom into the unique beings they are—instead of molding them
Let’s put this into practice with our toddlers.

M O NTE S SO R I
AC TIVITI E S
FO R TO D D LE R S

3
24	Montessori activities for the whole child
25	What makes an activity Montessori?
26	How to show the child an activity
27	General principles to keep in mind
31	How to set up an activity
34	Types of activities
34	Eye-hand coordination
37	Music and movement
39	Practical life
44	Arts and crafts
46	Language
60	An extra note on the outdoors and nature
62	What about non-Montessori toys?

24

M O NTE S SO R I AC TIV ITI E S FO R
TH E W H O LE C H I LD
Often the easiest way to begin with Montessori at home is to start with activities.
Montessori activities are based on developing the whole child. We begin by looking at
the child to see what their needs are. We then set up activities to meet those needs.
Toddlers’ needs consist of using their hands in various ways (working on their grasp, the
ability to reach across the middle of their body, hand-to-hand transfer, carrying objects,
using two hands together); practicing gross-motor movement; self-expression; and
communication.
Montessori activities for toddlers fall into five main areas:
1.	eye-hand coordination
2.	music and movement
3.	practical life (activities of daily life)
4.	arts and crafts
5.	language
There is a list of Montessori activities for toddlers in the appendix of this book. Ages
are given as an indication only. Be sure to follow the child and see which activities keep
their attention, removing those that are too hard or too easy.

25

W H AT M A K E S A N AC TIV IT Y
M O NTE S SO R I?
Montessori activities usually target one skill. For example, putting a ball into a box
through a small hole allows the child to master this one skill. This differs from many
traditional plastic toys that target multiple skills at the same time, with one part for
pushing, one part where a ball drops, another part that makes a noise, and so on.
We also prefer to use natural materials. Toddlers explore with all their senses. Natural
materials like wood are lovely to touch and generally safe for putting in their mouths,
and the weight of the object is more likely to be directly related to its size. Although they
are sometimes more expensive, wooden toys are often more durable and can be found
secondhand and then passed on once the child has finished with them. Storing activities
in containers made of natural materials, like woven baskets, incorporates handmade
elements and beauty into the space, too.
Many Montessori activities have a beginning, middle, and end. The child may begin
with a small part of the sequence and, as they develop, will be able to complete the full
work cycle, including replacing the activity on the shelf. They experience peace while
they are practicing the activity—and satisfaction once they complete it. For example,
when arranging flowers, at first a child may show interest only in pouring water and
using the sponge to wipe it up. Gradually they will learn all the steps and complete the
work cycle, filling small vases with water, arranging all the flowers, putting away the
materials at the end, and cleaning up any water that was spilled.
Montessori activities are complete. Completing an activity is important for their sense
of mastery. A child can become frustrated if, for example, a piece of a puzzle is missing.
If any pieces are missing, we remove the whole activity.
Activities are often organized in individual trays and baskets. Within each tray or
basket is everything the child needs to complete the task by themselves. For example,
if the activity involves water, we may want to include a sponge or hand mitt to clean up
any spills.
Children gain mastery of an activity through repetition. The activity should be exactly
at their level—challenging enough that it is not too easy yet not so difficult that they give
up. I love seeing a row of clothespins along the top of a painting on the drying rack—a
sign that a child has been busy working to master pinning up their paintings to dry.

26

They may focus on and repeat just one part of the activity. For example, they may
practice squeezing a sponge or filling a jug with water from a tap. We observe and allow
them to repeat and repeat the section they are trying to master. They will eventually add
steps to the process or move on to another activity.
A child has the freedom to choose an activity. Our spaces are set up to encourage this
freedom of choice by displaying a limited number of activities that they are working to
master.
“The task of teaching becomes easy, since we do not need to choose what
we shall teach, but should place all before him for the satisfaction of his
mental appetite. He must have absolute freedom of choice, and then he
requires nothing but repeated experiences which will become increasingly
marked by interest and serious attention, during his acquisition of some
desired knowledge.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, To Educate the Human Potential

H OW TO S H OW
TH E C H I LD A N AC TIV IT Y
In Montessori teacher training, we learn to show children how to do each activity in the
classroom by giving them “a presentation.” In a presentation, each activity is broken into
little steps, from taking the tray to the table, to presenting the activity step by step, to
returning the tray to the shelf. We practice the presentation for each activity over and
over. Then, if the child needs help in class, we know the activity so well from practicing
that we can improvise and step in to give them just as much help as they need.
We can use the same approach at home. We can set up an activity, do it ourselves first,
break the activity into little steps, and practice to see how our child might manage.
Let them choose the activity they are interested in and try it for as long as they can
without interfering. Even if they drop something, we can sit on our hands to see if they
will react and pick it up themselves. When we see that they are struggling and getting
frustrated, we can step in and say, “Watch,” and then show them, slowly, for example,
how to turn the lid of the jar. Then we can step back again to see how they manage.

27

Here are some tips for showing an activity to the child:
•• Make precise, slow hand movements so the child can observe clearly. For example,
break down all the tiny steps we take to open a button, and slowly show them each
one.
•• Avoid talking as we demonstrate—otherwise the child won’t know whether to look at
us while we talk or watch our hands.
•• Try to show them the same way each time to make it easier for them to pick up any
steps they may be missing.
•• Handle the objects in a way that the child can manage, for example, using two hands
to carry a tray, a glass, and so on.
•• If they don’t want us to help, they may be open to a verbal cue, like “Push, push.” Or
we can let them keep trying by themselves until they master the task. Or they may
walk away and try again at another time.

S LOW
H ANDS
O M IT
W ORDS

I first heard the acronym SHOW from my Montessori friend
Jeanne-Marie Paynel. It is a useful reminder to adults to use
slow hands and omit words when we are showing our children
something new.
This helps the child pick things up more easily. Our movements
are slow and easy to follow. If we explain with words at the same
time, our toddler isn’t sure whether to listen to us or watch us—
so we stay quiet so they can focus on our movements without
words.

G E N E R A L P R I N C I P LE S TO K E E P I N M I N D
1. Let the child lead
Follow the child’s pace and interests. Let them take the time to choose for themselves
rather than suggesting or leading the play. Let them pick from activities they are working
to master—nothing too easy or too difficult. Something challenging but not so hard that
they give up.

28

2. Let them work with the activity as long as they like
As the child is mastering an activity, we do not want to rush them to finish—even if a
sibling is waiting. Once they have finished the activity, ask if they would like to do it
again. This encourages repetition and gives them the chance to repeat, practice, master
the activity, and increase their concentration.
Ideally, we don’t interrupt our child’s deep focus. A simple comment from us can
distract them from whatever they are working to master, and they may abandon the
activity completely. Wait until they look to us for feedback, step in to offer help when
they are frustrated, or see that they have finished before we make a request like coming
to the table to eat dinner.

3. Avoid quizzing the child
We may not realize we are doing it, but we are constantly quizzing our children.
“What color is this?” “How many apples am I holding?” “Can you show Grandma how
you can walk?”
I did it too when my son was small. Often I’d ask him to demonstrate some new skill or
perform some new trick on cue. Maybe to show off in some way. Or maybe to push him
to learn a little faster.
Now I see that this prompting is a kind of test for a child. And there is generally only one
correct answer, so if the answer they give is wrong, we have no other option than to say,
“No, that flower is yellow, not blue.” Not exactly great for building a child’s confidence.
Instead we can continue to name things, ask questions to arouse curiosity, and use
observation to see what the child has mastered and what they are still practicing.
Now, the only time I will quiz a child is if I am 100 percent sure they know the answer
and will be excited to tell me. For example, if they have been identifying blue objects all
by themselves, I could point to something blue and ask, “What color is this?” They will
be delighted to shriek, “Blue!” This usually starts when they are about 3 years old.

4. Put the activity away when finished
When the child is finished with an activity, we can encourage them to return it to its
place on the shelf. This routine emphasizes that there is a beginning, middle, and end
to a task.

29

And putting things back in their special place on the shelf gives order and calm to
the space.
With young toddlers, we can first model where things belong and introduce putting
things back as the last part of the activity. We can then start to work together with
our child to bring things back to the shelf—they might carry one part and we carry
the other. Then we can scaffold onto this base by encouraging them to put it back by
themselves, for example, tapping the shelf where it belongs. Gradually we will see them
put things away more and more by themselves.
They may not do this every day, just as we do not feel like cooking every day. Instead of
insisting that they do, we could say, “You want me to do it? Okay, I’ll carry this one and
you carry that one.”
Even older children may need some help breaking the task into manageable parts.
“Let’s first put the blocks back, and then we’ll work on the books.”
If they have moved on to the next activity, I do not generally break their concentration.
Instead I put away the activity myself, modeling for the child what to do the next time.
They may not actually see us do it, but they may see us from the corner of their eye or
unconsciously absorb what we are doing.

5. Model, model, model
Our child learns a lot from observing us and other people around them. So we can think
how a young child could be successful and model that—for example, push in our chair
with two hands, avoid sitting on a low table or shelf, and carry just one thing at a time.

6. Allow any use of the materials, but stop when they’re used inappropriately
A child will explore activities in different ways (and often in ways we weren’t expecting).
We do not want to limit their creativity by stepping in to correct them. If they are not
harming the materials, themselves, or someone else, then there is no need to interrupt
them. We could perhaps make a mental note to show them its purpose at another time.
For example, if a child is using a watering can to fill a bucket, we could show them at
another neutral moment how to use the watering can to water some plants.
However, if the child is using the objects inappropriately, we may gently step in. For
example, “I can’t let you bang that glass on the window.” We could then show them that
the glasses are for drinking or show them an activity that allows them to use that skill,
for example, banging a drum or doing a small hammer-and-nail activity.

30

7. Modify to meet their level
We may be able to modify an activity to make it easier or more difficult. For example,
if our child is struggling with putting shapes into a shape sorter, we can keep the easier
shapes (like a cylinder) and remove the more difficult shapes. Then we can build up
slowly, adding in a few more shapes as our child gains more skill.
Sometimes for a younger child, when there are fewer items in a set, the child’s
concentration increases. For example, in my classroom we usually have five to eight
animals in our wooden barn, which gets used all the time. We can make more items
available as the child grows.

8. Arrange the activities on shelves from easiest to hardest
By putting the activities on the shelf in increasing difficulty from left to right, we
help the child move from easier to more difficult activities. If they find an activity too
difficult, they can move back to the earlier activity.

9. Use what is available
There is no need to buy all the materials featured in this book. They are meant only to
give an idea of the types of activities that will interest toddlers. Similar ones can be made
from things we already have lying around the house.
Here are some examples:
•• If our child is interested in how coins go into a slot, rather than buying a coin box, cut
a narrow slot into a shoe box and offer some large buttons for the child to put through
the hole.
•• If our child is interested in threading, they can thread dried penne pasta onto a shoe
lace with a large knot at the end.
•• If our child is interested in opening and closing, collect old jars and rinse them out
so our child can practice taking the lids on and off. Use old wallets or purses with
different clasps. Hide some fun things inside for them to discover.

10. Be careful with small parts and sharp objects
Montessori activities often involve objects with small parts, or may involve knives or
scissors. These activities should always be supervised. We don’t need to hover—yet we
keep observing in a calm way to make sure they are using the items in a safe way.

31

H OW TO S ET U P
A N AC TIVIT Y
Toddlers generally choose what to play with according to what looks interesting to them
in the moment.
So, instead of simply placing an activity on the shelf, I recommend taking a couple of
minutes to set it up in a way that makes it even more engaging for our child.
1.	Display it on a shelf. Rather than storing activities in a toy box, it is much easier
for a toddler to see what is available when we set a few things out on a shelf.
2. 	Make it attractive. Putting an activity into a basket or tray can make it more
appealing to a child. If the child does not seem interested in the activity anymore,
sometimes changing the tray can make it more appealing.
3.	Show what belongs together. A tray or basket keeps all the necessary items together.
For example, with a play-dough tray we can include a container of play dough;
implements they can use to mold, cut, and make patterns; and a mat to protect
the table.
4.	Prepare everything so our child can help themselves. In a painting area, we can
have the apron hanging on a hook off one side of the easel and a damp cloth hanging
off the other side at the ready for spills, to wipe their hands, or to clean the easel at the
end. There could be a basket of fresh paper so they can help themselves and a folding
clothesline with clothespins so they can hang their paintings to dry by themselves.
Younger children will need some help with these steps, but gradually they will be able
to take on more and more themselves.
5. 	Undo the activity. A completed activity is less attractive to a toddler than one that
has been left undone. Disassemble the activity before returning it to the shelf. Place
the pieces in a bowl to the left (say, puzzle pieces) and the activity to the right (the
empty puzzle base). Tracking the movement from left to right is indirect preparation
for reading.

32

H OW TO S ET U P
A N AC TIVIT Y
E X AM PLE S

ELEMENTS

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

tray
undone
left to right
easiest to hardest along shelf
at child’s height
beautiful to attract child’s interest
challenging to child—not too easy, not too difficult
everything at the ready
items the child can manage themselves

33

N O 1 WATERCOLOR

N O 2 SETTING TABLE

On a tray:
• watercolor brush
• small jar with small amount of water
• watercolor tablet (begin with one color
if you can find the colors separately,
so the colors aren’t mixed together)

We can show our child how to set the table,
providing the following:
• a real glass, small enough for a toddler
to manage
• bowl or plate
• small fork, spoon (knife if your child is
using one)

Also provide:
• an underlay to protect the table
• watercolor paper (a little thicker than
regular paper)
• a cloth for small spills

Also provide:
• a place mat with markings for fork, spoon,
knife, bowl, and glass

34

T Y P E S O F AC TIV ITI E S

01 / E Y E - H A N D CO O R D I N ATI O N
Toddlers are constantly refining their grasp and practicing working with two hands
together. Look for new ways to challenge these movements.

Threading activities
Threading allows our child to refine their grasp, eye-hand coordination, and dexterity,
and provides practice working with two hands together.
•• Up to 12 months, a baby will be able to remove large rings from a peg and start to
replace them.
•• Young toddlers can begin to sequence these rings in order from largest to smallest.
•• There is also a version with three colored pegs (red, yellow, and blue) and three
corresponding colored rings. At first the child is interested in putting the rings onto
any peg. Eventually, they start to put a red ring on, say, the blue peg, stop, look for the
red peg, and move the red ring to the red peg, matching the color.
•• We can then offer ways for the child to thread a ring horizontally—instead of a
vertical peg, we can make it horizontal. This introduces a movement called crossing
the midline, where the child makes a movement with one hand from one side of their
body to the other side across their midline.
•• Then we move from threading to bead stringing. A good intermediary step is to first
offer the child some beads and a wooden stick around 12 inches (30 cm) long.
•• Next we can offer a shoelace with some beads. Look for threading sets where the
shoelace has a wooden end on it around 1.5 inches (3–4 cm) long, which makes it
easier for younger toddlers.
•• Then we move on to stringing large beads onto a regular shoelace . . .
•• . . . and then stringing smaller beads onto a thin shoelace.

35

Posting activities
With posting activities the child learns to release an object into a container and begins
to understand object permanence (i.e., when something goes away, it can come back).
•• Up to 12 months—a baby enjoys putting balls into a box or banging a ball through a
hole with a hammer.
•• Around 12 months—the young toddler moves on to pushing shapes through holes,
starting with a cylinder. Then they can move on to more complex shapes such as a
cube, triangular prism, and so on.
•• With increasing dexterity the child can start inserting a large coin (or poker chip)
into a narrow slot. In our class, inserting coins into a coin box with a key is one of the
children’s favorite activities.

Opening and closing activities
Another way to work a child’s hands is to provide opportunities for them to open and
close various containers.
•• Use old purses with clasps, empty jars, containers with press stud fasteners, wallets
with zippers, and so on. I hide different objects inside for the child to find—a small
toy baby, a die, a spinning top, a key ring with the ring removed, etc.
•• Find lockboxes where the child can open and close various locks (including a padlock
with a key) to reveal small items hidden inside.

Pegboard and elastic bands; nuts and bolts
These activities are great ways to refine the child’s fine-motor development.
•• The child improves their coordination by stretching elastic bands over a pegboard.
•• The child can screw a nut onto the bolt with one hand holding the bolt and the other
turning the nut, allowing both hands to work together.
•• Offer various sizes of nuts and bolts so the child can organize them by size.

36

Sorting
Starting around 18 months, toddlers become interested in sorting objects by color,
type, and size. Supply a group of objects (or even better, find them with the child at the
beach, in the forest, or in the garden). Place them in a large bowl to sort into smaller
bowls. A container with compartments would also be perfect for a sorting activity.
Some examples of good sorting objects:
•• buttons in two or three different colors/sizes/shapes
•• shells, two or three different kinds
•• nuts in their shells, two or three different kinds

Stereognostic bags
Around 2.5 years, the child will be interested in figuring out what an object is simply by
feeling it. Then begins the fun with stereognostic bags, more simply known as mystery
bags. (Stereognosis is the ability to know an object by feeling around it.)
Find a bag (ideally one that is difficult to peek inside) and put a variety of objects inside.
The child can put their hand in and guess what they feel, or we can name an item for
them to feel for in the bag.
•• Place inside the bag random objects or objects around a theme or paired objects with
two of the same of each item.
•• Choose objects that are distinctively shaped, like keys or spoons, rather than items
like animals that are harder to distinguish.

Puzzles
Babies and young toddlers like pulling apart puzzles. Knob puzzles where the puzzle
pieces fit into a designated shape are perfect for this age. By the time our child is around
18 months, they may be able to fit some simple shapes into the puzzle base.
•• The young toddler can start with simple three-to-five-piece puzzles with large knobs.
Even if the child is unable to put the pieces back, they are refining their fine-motor
development. In this case, I would step in to model putting the pieces back so they
can repeat the process of taking them out.
•• From about 18 months, the child can move on to nine-piece puzzles with smaller
knobs or no knobs.

37

•• Jigsaw puzzles are the next step. Some look like a traditional puzzle with all the pieces
the same size. Other puzzles are in the shape of an object—for example, the shape of a
tree. The difficulty will depend on the number of pieces.
Note: Young children do not complete a jigsaw puzzle in the same way as an adult.
Adults often find the corners and edges first. Children, on the other hand, tend to tackle
the puzzle spatially, seeing which shapes fit together. When they are first starting to
work on jigsaw puzzles, we can have a turn first to show them or give them two pieces at
a time that fit together. They will gradually do more and more by themselves until they
have mastered it.

0 2 / M U S I C A N D M OV E M E NT
Music
All humans need to move, and all cultures have a long history of singing and dancing.
We don’t have to be able to sing or play music well for children to enjoy music in the
home. If we enjoy it, they will too. Making sounds with instruments, mimicking the
rhythm our child makes, copying the movements they are making, or playing start-andstop games are just as fun as singing along to a song.
Examples of musical instruments that are suitable for toddlers:
•• Instruments to shake, such as maracas, tambourines, gourds, and shakers
•• Instruments to strike with a mallet, such as a xylophone, drum, or tone block
•• Instruments that you blow into, such as a harmonica or recorder
•• Music boxes where we turn a handle to make a tune
Listening to music is its own activity. Even though they are a bit old-fashioned, a CD
player or an old iPod (one that stores only music) allows a child to select music for
themselves. We can even have a mat that they can unroll as a dancing mat.

38

Many children move instinctively when music comes on. A family may have traditional
or cultural dances that they enjoy performing or watching. Spontaneous singing with
actions is also fun, like singing along to “The Wheels on the Bus” or “Head, Shoulders,
Knees, and Toes.”
It is also lovely to take young children to concerts—many concert halls welcome
young children or have special performances for children where they can look at the
instruments at the end.

Movement
We can provide many movement opportunities for our children:
•• running
•• jumping
•• skipping
•• hopping
•• brachiating (swinging like a monkey)
•• biking
•• climbing
•• sliding
•• balancing
•• kicking and throwing balls
If possible, we can head outdoors for movement in the backyard, nearby forest,
playground, town square, beach, mountain, river, or lake—even if the weather is not
great. “There is no such thing as bad weather, just bad clothing,” as the Scandinavians
like to say. Living in the Netherlands, we put on our wet-weather clothes and cycle on.
We can also think about how to incorporate movement inside our home, space
permitting. In my classroom we have a climbing wall. The young children start to pull
up on the lower holds; as they get to around 2 years old, they climb with some support
from an adult, and it is not long before they are able to hold their own weight and climb
independently. Every muscle of their bodies is hard at work.
Children also like to hide, so think about creating spaces with blankets and chairs,
hammocks, and tents. Overgrown gardens make fun hiding spots, too.

39

0 3 / P R AC TI CA L LI F E
ACTIVITI E S O F DAI LY LI FE ARO U N D TH E H O M E

Most parents notice that toddlers love to help around the home, participating in
activities that have to do with looking after ourselves and our environment. These
activities might be chores to us, but young children love them. And I should mention
that they are great for calming active children.
Dr. Montessori discovered quickly that the children in her school wanted to help care
for the classroom, themselves, their classmates, and the environment. So she introduced
child-sized tools to help them succeed.
These activities are great for learning a sequence, like retrieving and putting on an apron
all the way through washing and drying the dishes.
The task will go more slowly and require supervision when the child helps. We’ll need to
lower our expectations about the final product—the banana slices may be a bit mashed
and the beans may have some ends that were missed. However, once they have mastered
the skills, our child will become more and more independent. My children have grown
up baking and cooking. Now that they are teenagers, they bake a lot and sometimes offer
to cook dinner as well.
Here are some ways children can help around the home:
•• Plant care—watering the plants, dusting the leaves, planting seeds, arranging flowers
in small vases (using a small funnel and small pitcher to fill the vase with water)
•• Food preparation—washing vegetables, beating eggs, scooping their own cereal out
of a small container and adding milk from a small jug
•• Snack time—helping themselves to food from an accessible snack area (which we
restock daily with the help of our child, putting out only as much as we are happy
for them to eat), peeling and slicing fruit, spreading topping on crackers, squeezing
orange juice, pouring water to drink from a small jug
•• Mealtimes—setting and clearing the table, washing dishes
•• Baking—taking turns, measuring ingredients, helping to add ingredients, stirring
•• Cleaning—sweeping, dusting, wiping spills, cleaning windows, polishing mirrors
•• Caring for pets—feeding the pet, helping to walk the dog, filling up a water bowl

40

•• Learning to care for themselves—blowing nose, brushing hair and teeth,
washing hands
•• Dressing themselves—taking socks on and off, fastening Velcro shoes, putting on
a T-shirt, pulling trousers up and down, putting on a coat (see page 140 to learn the
coat flip), practicing opening and closing zippers/snaps/buttons/shoelaces
•• Helping with the laundry—bringing dirty clothes to the laundry basket, putting
clothes in and taking them out of the washing machine, adding soap, sorting the
clean clothes
•• Getting ready for overnight visitors—making the beds, putting out a clean towel for
the guests, putting away toys
•• Trips to the supermarket—making a list with pictures, getting things from the
shelves, helping to push the shopping cart, passing things to us to put on the checkout
counter, carrying bags of groceries, putting groceries away at home
•• Volunteer work—It’s never too early to set the example of helping others. When my
children were young, one of our weekly outings was to a local nursing home where we
would visit the same residents each week. Seeing a young toddler and baby was the
highlight of their week, and it taught my children at an early age that it feels lovely to
help others.

Tips for practical life activities at home
Most of all, remember that it is meant to be fun. Stop before becoming overwhelmed.
And keep practicing!
•• Put out only as much as we want to clean up, be it water, dish soap, or a travel-sized
bottle of shampoo.
•• Have cleaning supplies at the ready: a hand mitt on the table to wipe up small spills,
a child-sized broom and mop for larger spills.
•• When children are younger than 2 years old, activities will likely have only 1 or 2
steps. As they gain mastery, add more steps (for example, put on an apron, wipe up at
the end, take wet cloths to the laundry, and so on).
•• Focus on the process, not the result. When the child helps, the task will take longer
and the result may not look perfect, but the child is learning to master these skills and
will become a lifelong helper at home.
•• Look for ways the child can help. When they are younger, keep it simple (an 18-monthold can help carry the T-shirt while we carry the pants to the laundry basket and/or
rinse some salad leaves for dinner); as they get to 2+ years, they can help out with
even more.

41

•• Look for baskets, trays, and simple caddies to arrange items for them to help, for
example, to keep all the window-cleaning items together at the ready.
•• We don’t have to spend a lot of money. Keep it budget friendly by creating activities
with things around the home. And look out for a few nice things like a wooden
broom or a larger item like a learning tower to add to a list for birthdays and other
special occasions.

Benefits of practical life activities at home
Beyond the simple pleasure young children take from these practical life activities,
they are valuable in more ways than one:
•• The child is learning to take responsibility in the home.
•• We are working together to create, practice, and master the activities.
•• Collaboration creates connection.
•• These skills require repetition to gain mastery, which is great for building
concentration.
•• Our child enjoys feeling like a part of the family and being able to contribute.
•• These activities involve sequences. As our child’s concentration grows, we can
increase the number of steps in the activity.
•• These activities involve a lot of movement, great for refining fine-motor and grossmotor skills (for example, pouring water without spilling, using a sponge).
•• There are many language opportunities around these activities: talking about what
we’re doing together and giving vocabulary for kitchen implements, food, tools for
cleaning, and so on.
•• The child learns new skills, independence, and a feeling of self-reliance.
I always say it is good to start young to lay a strong foundation while they are willing.
These practical life skills help children learn to care for themselves, care for others
(pets, for example), and care for their environment.

42

SO M E AT- H O M E P R AC TI CA L LI F E
AC TIVITI E S BY AG E

Wondering how to include your child
around the home? Here are some ideas
for various ages.
You can see how we scaffold their skills
with these simple one-step activities
for children from 12 to 18 months. Then,
in addition to these activities, we offer
activities of increasing difficulty for children
from 18 months to 3 years. The child
from 3 to 4 years old can begin longer,
more complex tasks, in addition to those
activities from earlier age groups.

12 to 18 months
KITCHEN

•

•
•
•
•
•

Pour glass of water or milk using small
jug—use small amount of liquid to avoid
large spills
Add milk to cereal
Scoop cereal into bowl
Wipe up spills with hand mitt
Take plate to kitchen
Drink from a glass

BATHROOM

•
•
•
•
•

Brush hair
Brush teeth with assistance
Wash hands
Pack away bath toys
Fetch and hang up towel

BEDROOM

•
•
•
•
•
•

Fetch diaper/underwear
Put dirty clothes in laundry basket
Open curtains
Choose between two options for
clothing
Get dressed with assistance
Take off socks

OTHER

•
•
•
•

Help put toys away
Fetch shoes
Help the parent (for example, “Can you
bring me the watering can, please?”)
Turn light switch on/off

43

18 months to 3 years

3 to 4 years

KITCHEN

KITCHEN

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Prepare a snack/sandwich
Peel and slice a banana
Peel a mandarin orange
Peel and cut an apple with assistance
Wash fruits and vegetables
Make orange juice
Set the table/clear the table
Wipe the table
Sweep the floor—use a dustpan and brush
Make coffee for parent (push buttons on
coffee machine/fetch cup and saucer)

•

BATHROOM

•
•
•
•

BATHROOM

•
•
•
•

Blow nose
Brush teeth
Wash body—use small travel-sized soap
bottles to minimize waste
Clean face

Unload dishwasher
Measure and mix ingredients for baking
Scrub and peel vegetables, such as
potatoes and carrots
Assist with cooking (for example, making
lasagna)

Use toilet/flush toilet/close toilet seat
Place wet clothing in laundry area
Wipe with assistance after using toilet
Wash hair—use travel-sized bottles to
minimize waste

BEDROOM

•
•

Make bed—pull up duvet
Pack clothes into drawers/closet

OTHER
BEDROOM

•
•
•

Help to make bed by pulling up cover
Choose clothes
Get dressed with little help

OTHER

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Arrange flowers in small vases
Pack and carry bag/backpack
Put on coat
Put on shoes with Velcro closure
Water plants
Put toys into baskets and return them
to shelf
Clean windows
Load/unload washing machine and dryer
Sort socks and clothing by color
Fetch products in supermarket/push
cart/help unpack groceries
Dust
Put leash on dog and brush dog

•
•
•
•
•
•

Feed pets
Help with recycling
Fold laundry
Fold socks
Vacuum
Open car door with remote

44

0 4 / A RT S A N D C R A F T S
Dr. Montessori was asked if the Montessori environment produced good artists. Her
response: “I don’t know if we produce good artists. But we do produce a child with
an eye that sees, a soul that feels, and a hand that obeys.” For toddlers, arts and crafts
activities are about self-expression, movement, and experiencing different materials.
The process takes precedence over the product.
Types of arts and crafts activities:
•• For young toddlers, we start with drawing. Look for crayons or pencils that glide
easily on the paper. Chunky pencils are generally easier for a young toddler to
grip, and produce more color than a regular color pencil. Crayons made of natural
materials like beeswax or soy are lovely to draw with.
•• We can then add a watercolor activity. I like to start with one or two colors at first.
If we add more colors, everything tends to turn brown. The tray can contain a
very small jar for holding water (little jam jars from hotels are the perfect size), a
watercolor brush, and a dish with the watercolor tablet/s. We can have a piece of
paper on an underlay (to protect the table), more paper if they would like to repeat,
and a cloth at the ready for spills.
•• We can introduce using scissors (with supervision) from around 18 months. For the
cutting work, use real scissors with rounded ends that cut well, and show the child
how to use them appropriately. We can show them we sit down at the table to use
them and hold the handles, not the blades. Offer small strips of paper, which will be
easier to snip. The pieces can then be collected into a small envelope and closed with
a sticker.
•• Around 18 months, a gluing activity can be great fun and help them refine their
movements by using a small brush with a pot of glue (or a glue stick) to apply glue to
the back of the shape and stick it onto the paper.
•• Paint and chalk are also fun for toddlers. For younger toddlers, we may wish to only
put out paint when we are able to supervise. Again, have wet cloths at the ready for
wiping hands, the floor, or the board.
•• Clay, play dough, and kinetic sand are lovely creative mediums for toddlers. We can
add some simple tools like a rolling pin, cookie cutters, a blunt knife, or shaping tools
to manipulate the material in many ways. I love making play dough with them, too.
(See page 234 for my favorite recipe for homemade play dough.)

45

•• Around 2.5 years, we can offer simple sewing activities. The sewing box can contain
a needle case with a blunt darning needle, some thread, and a 4" x 4" (10 cm x 10 cm)
cardboard square with holes punched along the diagonal.
•• Short visits to museums help cultivate an appreciation of art. At the museum, we can
look for colors, textures, and animals. We can play simple games, like selecting
a postcard from the museum shop and then looking for the painting in the gallery.

Tips for arts and crafts
1. Try not to be prescriptive. Rather than showing a child what to make with the art
materials, we show them how to use the materials and leave the experimentation up to
them. For this reason, Montessori teachers prefer not to use coloring books because of the
suggestion that children need to stay within the lines. Similarly we try not to limit children
to using only green for grass and blue for sky. They can be creative in their choices.
2. Give feedback. In Montessori, rather than tell the child their artwork is “good” we
like to leave it up to the child to decide if they like what they have made.
Instead we can give feedback and encouragement. We can describe what we see; for example,
“I see you made a line over here in yellow.” This can be more meaningful than saying, “Good
job.” Then the child really knows what we appreciate when we are looking at their work.
Also, because toddlers are mostly still just making movements of self-expression, we
can ask, “Would you like to tell me about your painting?” rather than “What is it?” It
may not be a picture of anything in particular but may simply be an expression of the
movements in their body.
3. Use good-quality materials. I always recommend quality over quantity, which is
particularly important when working with art materials. I would rather buy a few goodquality pencils than have many cheaper ones that break easily and do not have rich colors.
4. Show by example. When showing our child how to use art materials, it is often better
to draw squiggles or loose lines than draw a picture. If we show them a perfect-looking
flower and they can only scribble, some children will not try at all.
And although it is fun and highly recommended to create together, side by side, it’s
better to take our own piece of paper than to draw on our child’s paper. We do not know
the child’s intention for the work. Think of it as a fellow student’s picture in an art class.
Would we draw a little love heart on their self-portrait?
The best example of all is to hang beautiful artwork from artists on the walls of our
home and at child height, too, for the whole family to appreciate.

46

0 5 / L A N G UAG E
“There is a ‘sensitive period’ for naming things . . . and if adults respond to
the hunger for words in an appropriate way, they can give their children a
richness and precision of language that will last a lifetime.”
—Dr. Silvana Montanaro, Understanding the Human Being

We have an amazing opportunity to expose our toddlers to beautiful, rich language
that they will absorb with ease. Just as a child can learn the names of different fruits
(bananas, apples, grapes, and so on), they can learn the names of different vehicles, from
front-end loader to mobile crane, or different birds, from flamingo to toucan. Have fun
with it. Likely we will discover limitations in our own vocabulary when we don’t know
the name of a specific bird, tree, or truck. Then we can look up the names with our child
to find out.

Vocabulary baskets (also known as nomenclature materials)
To help toddlers grow their desire to learn words, we can put together vocabulary
baskets for them to explore. These baskets have objects classified by theme: items from
the kitchen; Australian animals; tools; or musical instruments. This makes it easy for
our child to learn new words in a group of familiar objects.
•• The first type of vocabulary basket contains real objects that the child can touch, feel,
and explore as we name them, such as three to five fruits or vegetables.
•• The next level is replica objects. Because we can’t have real elephants in our
classrooms or homes, we use replicas to present more vocabulary objects. Again
the child can hold the object in their hand as we name it—a very tactile, hands-on
approach to learning language.
•• The child is then ready to learn that a 3D object is the same as a 2D picture. We can
make matching identical cards with pictures of the objects on them so the child can
match the object to a picture that is exactly the same. It’s nice to take photos of the
objects and print them so the image is the same size as the object—toddlers love to
place the matching object on top to “hide” the picture underneath.
•• Once a child is matching pictures that are exactly the same as the objects, they will
start matching similar cards. We can make a card with a picture of a garbage truck
that looks similar to it but isn’t exactly the same. They then have to really abstract
(continued on page 48)

47

H OW TO WO R K W ITH
L A N G UAG E M ATE R IA L S
G IVI N G A TH R EE- PER I O D LE S SO N

PERIOD ONE

name the objects

PERIOD TWO

play games

The primary objective of vocabulary baskets is for the toddler to learn
the word for something. We name each object as we look at it, turn it
around, feel it, and explore it. We give just the name of the object, for
example, giraffe, instead of a full description of a giraffe with a long
neck and so on.
We can play games to see which objects they can identify. “Can you
find me the whisk?” They show us the whisk, and we say, “You found
the whisk.” And we mix them up.
When working with the cards, we can play several games:
• Lay the cards down one by one and have the child find the object
that matches.
• Ask the child to choose an object, and one by one show them the
cards until they spot the matching card.
• Fan the cards with the pictures hidden from them and ask them to
pick a card; then they can look for the matching object.
If they choose the wrong object to go with the card, make a mental
note of which object names they are mixing up. We do not correct
them and say “no.” I might say something like, “Ah, you wanted to put
the violin on the cello.” At a later time we can go back to period one
and present the names again.

PERIOD THREE

testing	

With children over 3 years old, when we know they have mastered
the name of an object, we can ask, “What is this?” The child
is delighted they know the answer and are very pleased with
themselves as they name the object. When they are younger
than 3 years old, we do not do the third period, because they are
often preverbal or may make a mistake, which undermines their
confidence. Wait until our child absolutely knows the names of the
objects before doing this step.

48

the essence of a garbage truck, rather than simply matching the size, color, or shape.
This step can often be done by matching pictures in books to objects in our home.
Our child may pick up a toy cockatoo and run over to their bookshelf to show us a
picture of a cockatoo in their favorite book.
•• The final step for toddlers is vocabulary cards. We can offer cards with pictures of
objects around a theme—vehicles, gardening tools—to help children learn names.
Books

We can choose lovely books to share with our children, and we can read aloud often.
Children under 6 years old base their understanding of the world on what they see
around them. Therefore, they love books that reflect things they know from their daily
life: books about going shopping, visiting grandparents, getting dressed, city life,
the seasons, and colors. One of the favorites from our classroom is Sunshine by Jan
Ormerod, a book without words that tells the story of a little girl waking up and getting
ready to leave the house.
Don’t be surprised if children read a book about a witch and think that witches are
real and scary. The Montessori philosophy is to wait until they are over 6 years old
to introduce fantasy (especially scary fantasy), when they begin to understand the
difference between reality and fantasy.
What to look for in books:
•• Realistic pictures. This is what children see in their daily lives and can immediately
and more easily relate to—rather than having a bear driving a car, look for pictures
of people behind the wheel.
•• Beautiful images. Children will absorb the beauty of the artwork in the book, so look
for gorgeous illustrations.
•• Number of words. For young toddlers we may have single words or simple sentences
on a page. This will build to longer sentences on a page for older toddlers. Older
toddlers also enjoy rhyming books. And don’t forget poetry books.
•• Different types of pages. Start with board books; move on to paper pages as the child
learns how to handle books. Lift-the-flap books are also fun for toddlers and teach
children to be careful as they open the flaps.
•• Books we enjoy. Children pick up a love of reading from adults, so choose books you
will want to read many times, knowing that a toddler will often shout, “Again! Again!”
•• Books that reflect diversity. Find books that reflect families, races, nationalities, and
belief systems that are different from our own.

49

We show children how to handle books, just as we would show them how to carry a
glass. We can slow our movements to turn the page carefully and replace the book with
care on the shelf when finished.
Occasionally we may want to have a book in our collection that is not based in reality.
Then I would point it out in a fun way. “Do bears really go to the library? Noooo. How
interesting. This is pretend. Let’s take a look at what happens.”

Conversations with our child
Describe the world around us

The adults in the environment are a child’s primary source of language, so we can use
any moment during our day to describe what we are doing. This could be anything from
walking outside to getting dressed in the morning to cooking dinner. Use rich language,
giving the proper words for the things we find, like the names of dogs, vegetables, food,
vehicles, trees, and birds.
Self-expression

Even a young toddler can have a conversation. Conversations help children learn that
what they say is important and encourage language development. We can stop what we
are doing, look them in the eye, let them take as long as they need, and—hard as it is—
try not to finish their sentences.
If our child says “ba-ba” for ball, we can show we have listened by including the real
word in a sentence. For example, “Yes, you threw the ball into the garden.”
We can ask simple questions to help them expand their story. Or if the child is preverbal
and we are not sure what they want to tell us, we can ask them to show us.
Moments of silence

Don’t forget to include moments of silence in the day. It is difficult to filter out
background noise, and it’s not ideal for language acquisition. In addition, we adults like
to give our children feedback on everything they do. But it is also okay to remain silent
sometimes and allow our child to evaluate for themselves what they have done.
Children understand more than baby talk and simple instructions. They want to be
included in the communications of our daily life.

5
1

2
6

3

7

4

8

51

01 / E Y E - H A N D CO O R D I N ATI O N

N O 1 PEG PUZZLE

N O 5 THREADING

This peg puzzle has five pieces, which is
perfect for a young toddler. The size of the
knob is small to help refine their grasp. From
around 18 months.

Threading activities are great for the child
to practice working with two hands together.
We can vary the size of the beads and the
thickness of the thread, depending on their
ability. From 16 months.

N O 2 POSTING

The child works on refining their posting
skills to fit a coin through a small slot. This is
one of the favorite activities in our class for
children starting around 16 months.

N O 6 OPENING AND CLOSING

Children love to find small objects inside
old purses, jars with lids, or containers with
different openings such as zippers, press
studs, and clasps. From 18 months.

N O 3 NUTS AND BOLTS

This set is great for organizing the nuts and
bolts from smallest to largest and practicing
putting the nut on the bolt. The child begins
with placing the bolts in the correct holes.
Older toddlers will love to master the nuts.
From around 2 years.
N O 4 MYSTERY BAGS

These mystery bags are for learning what
an object is, using only the sense of touch.
We can hide objects around a theme, paired
objects, or—most difficult—random objects
from around the home. From 2.5 years. 

N O 7 SORTING

Sorting by type, size, and color is interesting
to toddlers. Sorting small buttons by color is
for children from 2 years.
N O 8 PEGBOARD AND ELASTICS

I love watching toddlers develop their eyehand coordination with this activity. They
learn to stretch elastic bands over the pegs,
which takes great concentration. Older
children also use this activity to make some
fun patterns. From around 2 years.

1

3

2

5

4

6

7

8

53

0 2 / M U S I C A N D M OV E M E NT

N O 1 STRIKING

N O 5 BALANCE BIKE

Making sounds by striking/banging an
instrument is perfect for both young and
older toddlers. Think of triangles, drums,
tone blocks, and xylophones. With a younger
toddler, assist if needed (for example, hold
the triangle while they strike it). For any
age toddler.

Once the child is tall enough, a balance bike
without pedals can be a great alternative to
a traditional tricycle. Riding on two wheels,
they push themselves along with their feet.
Then gradually they begin to take their feet
off the ground while they coast, getting used
to the feeling of balancing—a useful step
before they learn to ride a bike. With time
and at their own pace, they often transition
easily to a regular bike without training
wheels. From around 2 years.

N O 2 SHAKING

Instruments that make sound by shaking are
the easiest instruments to begin with. I love
the variety of maracas available, from egg
shaped to the more traditional kind. Look out
for rainmakers, which make soothing sounds
as the beads fall or are shaken. For any age
toddler.
N O 3 MUSIC BOX

Turning a handle to make music is enjoyable
for toddlers. Younger toddlers may need
some assistance at first, perhaps with the
adult holding the music box while they turn
it. Seek out large, solid versions for younger
toddlers. Older toddlers will enjoy the
challenge of turning a smaller music maker
(as pictured on opposite page). For any age
toddler.

N O 6 OUTSIDE

Heading out into nature, making nature
collections, and crafting with treasures from
our walks are just a few of the ways to enjoy
the outside with young children. Go outside
often—just add some weatherproof clothing
if needed! For any age toddler.
N O 7 BALLS

Taking a variety of balls outside encourages
kicking, rolling, coordination, strength, and,
of course, fun. For toddlers, it is generally
best to use balls outside, so that they have
enough space to play. For any age toddler.
N O 8 SLIDE

N O 4 BLOWING

Simple instruments like a harmonica or
recorder are fun for toddlers. They can
experiment with rhythm, speed, and volume,
and perhaps a variety of notes. For an older
toddler. 	

This is a Pikler slide, which could be used
inside the home. The height of the slide can
be adjusted as the child grows. They can
also enjoy climbing up the slide as much
as sliding down. Or look for a slide on a
playground, preferably one they can manage
independently. For any age toddler.

1

2

3

4

5

7

6

55

0 3 / P R AC TI CA L LI F E

N O 1 CARE OF SELF

N O 5 WINDOW CLEANING

There are many opportunities for our child
to learn how to look after themselves as we
gradually scaffold their skills so they can do
more and more for themselves. They love to
master these tasks, including brushing their
hair and their teeth, blowing their nose, and
washing their hands. From 15 months.

It is amazing how toddlers are able to
manage squeezing a spray bottle to clean
the windows—the repeated movement is
great for their hand strength. Then they can
wipe the windows from top to bottom with
a squeegee and use a cloth to dry them. We
can use water or add some vinegar to make
the windows sparkle. From 18 months.

N O 2 FOOD PREPARATION

Toddlers love to make their own snack or help
with meal preparation. Look for tools that are
suited to small hands so they can succeed. At
first the child will need some assistance. For
example, first we can show them how to peel
the apple. Then we can hold the apple on a
board while they peel from top to bottom,
putting the peel into a bowl to take to the
compost bin afterward. We show them how to
place their hands safely on the apple cutter.
We can slice the apple across the middle so
the child can easily push the apple cutter
through the fruit. Apple cutting from 2 years.

N O 6  FLOWER ARRANGING

Flower arranging is a multistep process that
allows the toddler to refine their fine-motor
skills and practice carrying and pouring
water with control—all while adding beauty
to the home. First, they can fill a very small
jug with water from the tap and place it on a
tray to catch any water that might spill. Using
a small funnel, they can pour the water into
the vase. Then they can place a flower in the
vase and place the vase on a doily (which
is a nice extra step, good for developing
concentration). Have a sponge at the ready
for small spills. From 18 months.

N O 3 TABLE SETTING

Use a low cupboard to provide toddlers
access to their bowl, cutlery, and glass so
they can set the table following a marked
place mat as a guide.
N O 4 BAKING

Toddlers can help to add ingredients that
we have measured, mix ingredients with a
wooden spoon, knead dough, use cookie
cutters, and decorate baked goods. And yes,
they also can help us with tasting the finished
product. From 12 months. 

N O 7 CLEANING

Having small cleaning tools at the ready—
for example, a broom, a mop, a dustpan
and brush, hand mitts, and sponges—allows
the toddler to learn to care for the home.
Most toddlers love to help sweep, mop,
and dust. This small dustpan and brush are
useful for sweeping up crumbs and provide
great practice for working with two hands
together. From 12 months.

2

1

3

4

5

6

7

57

0 4 / A RT S A N D C R A F T S

N O 1 WATERCOLOR PAINTING

Watercolors are perfect for toddlers who
want to paint—even a young toddler can have
success, without as much potential for mess
as markers or paint. Start with just one color.
Look for single watercolor tablets, pop out
one color from a watercolor palette, or cut
the palette into single colors if possible. The
child can practice wetting the brush, getting
paint onto the brush, and making marks
on the paper. They are not learning how to
draw at this age—they are learning how to
use the materials and how to express their
movements on paper. From 18 months.
N O 2 SEWING

Start with a simple sewing card, a blunt
darning needle, and thread that is doubled
and knotted at the end. We can show them
how to push the needle into the hole, turn
the card over, and pull the needle out the
other side. Then the needle goes into the
next hole, the card is turned over, and again
the needle is pulled through, making a stitch.
When the card is complete, cut the thread
with scissors to remove the needle and make
a knot. From 2 years.

the scissors in one hand and hold the strip
for themselves. Around 2 years.
N O 4 SCRIBBLING

My favorite scribbling materials for toddlers
are soft chunky pencils and beeswax crayon
blocks. We can change the paper size, color,
and material from time to time to offer
variety. Again, they are learning how to use
the materials rather than learning to draw.
From 12 months.
N O 5 CHALK AND ERASER

Offer chunky chalk that fits easily in the
child’s hands, and provide a large surface,
such as a big chalkboard or the sidewalk. A
large surface allows movement of the whole
arm as they practice using the chalk and
cleaning with the eraser. From 12 months.
N O 6 GLUING

Affixing small shapes onto paper with a glue
brush and a small pot of glue helps refine
movements. (Alternatively, offer a glue stick.)
The glue can be brushed onto the back of
the shape, then turned over and stuck onto
the paper. From 18 months.

N O 3 SCISSORS

N O 7 CLAY/PLAY DOUGH/KINETIC SAND

First the child learns how to hold the scissors
safely while sitting at the table. At first,
they use two hands to open and close the
scissors. Then we can introduce cutting,
starting with a sturdy piece of card cut into
thin strips. Hold the strip for them to snip.
The pieces can be collected into a bowl
and then placed into a small envelope and
sealed with a sticker. Repeat. As their hand
strength develops, they will be able to hold

Working clay with their hands and using
simple tools encourages the child’s hand
strength and creativity. The clay can be
rolled flat, made into a log, cut into small
pieces, rolled into a ball, or molded in infinite
ways. I love to switch out the clay for play
dough or kinetic sand from time to time to
provide a variety of sensorial experiences.
From 16 months.

1
2

4

3

5

59

0 5 / L A N G UAG E

N O 1 REPLICA OBJECTS

N O 4 REAL OBJECTS

To learn new vocabulary, we can offer
realistic replicas around a theme like cooking
implements, African animals, or musical
instruments. The child can touch and feel
around the object while they hear its name—
another example of learning with concrete
materials. For any age toddler.

The most direct way for the child to learn
vocabulary is from objects in their daily life.
Just as they learn the names of fruit, we can
name flowers in our home and at the market,
trees and birds we see in the park, and items
around the house. Shown here are some
garden peas and a set of cards, where the
child learns that a three-dimensional object
can be represented by a two-dimensional
image. From 12 months. With cards from
14 months.

N O 2 CARDS

As the child gets older, we can extend
opportunities to build vocabulary by offering
cards with pictures around a theme. That way
we are not limited by the replicas or objects
we can find. Featured here are artworks by
Vincent van Gogh. From 18 months.
N O 3 BOOKS

Reading with our toddlers is a joy when we
find books we both love. Look for books
about seasons, daily life, animals, colors,
shapes, vehicles, nature, and our child’s
favorite topics. For older toddlers, we can
add books filled with details to explore or
counting books. For any age toddler.

N O 5 OBJECTS WITH CARDS
(IDENTICAL AND SIMILAR)

We can draw or photograph an object to
make a set of identical cards. Once the
child is able to match objects with cards
that are identical, we can increase the
difficulty by using images that are similar to
the objects but not exactly the same. The
object may be a dump truck, and we would
offer them a picture of any dump truck (of a
different model, color, size). This helps them
understand the essence of a dump truck.
With cards from 14 months.

60

A N E XTR A N OTE O N TH E
O UTD OO R S A N D N ATU R E
“Let the children be free; encourage them; let them run outside when it is
raining; let them remove their shoes when they find a puddle of water; and,
when the grass of the meadows is damp with dew, let them run on it and
trample it with their bare feet; let them rest peacefully when a tree invites
them to sleep beneath its shade; let them shout and laugh when the sun
wakes them in the morning as it wakes every living creature that divides its
day between waking and sleeping.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, The Discovery of the Child

I love how even in the early 1900s, Dr. Montessori had such a holistic idea of children
and their development, including the importance of the outdoors and nature. Nature
has the ability to calm us, to connect us with beauty, and to reconnect us to the earth
and environment.
Young children are sensorial learners. The quote from Dr. Montessori above embodies
how rich their experiences can be. Even now as an adult, the memories of walking
barefoot in the grass from my own childhood are still so strong.
If we live in the city, we can plan adventures in nature every few months. It might be
for an afternoon at the seaside or spending a few nights away in a tent or cabin.
Here are some ways to include Montessori activities outdoors and in nature:
1.	Seasonal activities. Depending on the season we could take a basket to the local
park or a nearby forest to collect leaves, acorns, shells, sticks, rocks, stones, and
pinecones. Fruit picking varies by season, too.
2.	Grow vegetables. It isn’t necessary to have a garden to grow vegetables at home.
Set up a potting station with some soil, a scoop, and some seeds. Have a watering
can at the ready. Composting—adding food waste to a compost bin or worm farm—
helps our children learn about the food cycle and returning nutrients to the soil.
3.	Movement opportunities. Climb trees; balance along walls, tree stumps, or logs;
hang from branches; swing from a tire; ride a balance bike; kick a ball; jump with
a jump rope; chase each other; run fast; and walk slowly.

61

4.	Notice the beauty of the outdoors together. Watch insects at work, droplets on
leaves, the colors of the sunset, the vistas from the mountains, the stillness or the
ripples on a lake, the movement of the ocean, or the wind in the trees, or simply
take in the gloriousness of the flowers and bees in a neighbor’s garden. Grab a
magnifying glass to explore close up, touch with our hands, listen to the movement
of the trees and grass, and smell the rain or flowers.
5.	Find moments of quiet. Find a place to sit and watch the clouds, to sit in silence, or
just to breathe.
6.	Make treasure hunts. Make a list of pictures and work together to find all the items
on the list. It could be in the garden, at the park, in the forest, or any outdoor place.
7. 	Build a hut, cubby house, or obstacle course, and invite over some friends.
8.	Make outdoor art. Use mud, water, leaves, flowers, soil, seeds, grass, and any other
natural treasures that you find. Lay them into patterns, make them into shapes, or
work together to make a face or an animal.
9.	Make a musical wall. In the garden, hang old pots and pans, bells, and any other
objects that make some sound when banged. Find some sticks to make some music.
10.	All-weather exploration. There is no such thing as bad weather, just bad clothing.
So get some great all-weather clothing and shoes (for the adult and the child) and
stomp in those puddles, make a snowman, or put on a hat and sunscreen and
explore the beach. Get out each and every day.
Bonus: Anything to do with water—spraying the windows, filling a bucket and painting
bricks with a brush, running through a sprinkler, making rivers with sand and water, or
using a water pump at the playground.

62

W H AT A B O UT N O N - M O NTE S SO R I TOYS?
There is a difference between a Montessori classroom and a Montessori home. Although
we would not include these toys in a Montessori classroom, we may choose to include
a few well-selected toys for open-ended play at home. If we are new to the Montessori
approach, we can start with the toys we already have in our homes—keep out our child’s
favorites, donate the ones that are no longer being used, and put some toys into storage
that we will rotate later.
Here are some ideas:
•• Duplo/Lego
•• wooden blocks
•• construction vehicles, emergency vehicles, farm vehicles
•• barn and farm animals
•• Playmobil sets based on daily life (rather than fantasy, like princesses or pirates)
•• a wooden marble run
•• loose parts collected from nature adventures
•• construction sets
•• train sets
•• board games
There is room for such open-ended play in the home—the child explores the materials
in many creative ways, makes discoveries for themselves, and plays out imaginative
scenarios from their daily lives. Yet they aren’t a replacement for the Montessori
activities we have discussed in this chapter, which give a toddler such satisfaction from
mastery and meet so many of a young child’s developmental needs.
If a child starts attending a Montessori preschool program, I’d advise against replicating
the Montessori materials at home so that they will stay engaged at school. Instead we can
continue Montessori at home by including the child in daily life and making sure they
have time for unstructured play, opportunities to create, time outdoors, and time for rest.
They will continue to practice skills through practical life, arts and crafts, movement and
music, and books.

63

TO P R AC T I C E
1. 	Can we provide eye-hand coordination activities to challenge our child’s finemotor skills?
2.	Can we provide rich music and movement opportunities?
3.	Can we include our child in daily life (practical life activities)?
food preparation / self-care / care of the environment
4.	What arts and crafts possibilities are available?
5.	How can we support a rich language environment at home?
objects / books / conversation

In this chapter, we have seen how observing our children’s interests and abilities and
providing them with beautiful and engaging activities can help develop the whole child.
We can use items we already have in the home, and Montessori activities don’t need to
be fully integrated from the first day. Instead we can try a few things to shift toward a
Montessori approach at home, observe our child more, build our own confidence, and
keep following the child.
And, let’s not forget the simplest things, the things that will create memories with our
children:
•• Let’s savor the laughter and giggles.
•• Let’s invite our children to share in the daily activities of the home.
•• Let’s enjoy the puddles when it rains.
•• Let’s collect autumn leaves and hang them in the window.
•• Let’s build tents indoors.
•• Let’s leave our children to explore a moment longer.
•• Let’s comb the beach for shells, in any season.
•• Let’s cuddle our loved ones an extra time or two.
•• Let’s enjoy the crispness of the air as we cycle through the city.

S ET TI N G U P
TH E H O M E

4

66	Setting up Montessori-style spaces
67	Room by room
67	Entrance
67	Living room
68	Kitchen
69	Eating area
69	Bedroom
70	Bathroom
70	Arts and crafts area
71	Cozy place for reading
71	Outside
73	General principles to keep in mind
73	Tackling the clutter
74	Making it cozy
74	Setting up our home to save us work
75	Sharing spaces
75	Small spaces
76	The importance of the home environment
78	Home tour

66

S ET TI N G U P M O NTE S SO R I - ST Y LE S PAC E S
Walk into a Montessori classroom for the first time, and it is immediately apparent that
the space has been beautifully arranged with the children’s needs in mind.
The same principles are easy to apply in the home. We aren’t aiming to have a perfect
home, but we can be intentional in setting up our spaces.
Not every space has to be child-sized. After all, there are different-sized people with
different needs in our home. However, it is possible to have a space in each area of our
home that is set up for our child to enjoy and feel comfortable in, too.

E i g h t t i p s f o r s e t t i n g u p yo u r h o m e
1. 	Child-sized. Find furniture that the child can manage without help. Look for
chairs and tables that are the right height to allow their feet to sit flat on the
floor; cut the legs of the furniture a bit if necessary.
2. 	B eauty in the space. Display art and plants at the child’s height for them to enjoy.
3. I ndependence. Have activities and materials set up in trays and baskets so they
have everything they need at the ready; look for ways to make it easy for the
child to help themselves.
4. 	Attractive activities. Have age-appropriate activities beautifully arranged on
shelves—rather than in toy boxes—that are inviting to them.
5. 	Less is more. Displaying only a few activities helps the child’s concentration;
display only the ones they are working to master, so they don’t feel
overwhelmed.
6. 	A place for everything and everything in its place. Toddlers have a particularly
strong sense of order. When we have a place for everything and everything is in
its place, it helps them learn where things belong (and where to put them away).
7. 	S ee the space through their eyes. Get down to the child’s height in each space
to see what it looks like from their perspective. We may see some tempting
wires or some clutter under the shelves, or it may feel overwhelming.
8. 	Store and rotate. Create storage that ideally is out of children’s sight and easy
on the eye—think floor-to-ceiling cupboards that blend into the wall color, an
attic space, or containers that can be stacked in a storage area or behind a
couch. Store most of the child’s activities, and rotate the activities on their
shelves when they are looking for new challenges.

67

ROO M BY RO O M
Let’s look at the different areas of our home and see how these principles can be applied.
(For a resource list, see page 226.)
These are only ideas and are not prescriptive. Adapt them to suit. Limitations of space or
light give us opportunities to be creative.

Entrance

•• Low hooks at the child’s height where they can hang up their
(child-sized) backpack/bag, jacket, hat, and raincoat
•• Basket or shelf for shoes
•• Basket for seasonal items such as mittens, scarves, woolen hats,
sunglasses, and so on
•• Low mirror with a small table or shelf for things like tissues, hair
clips, and sunscreen
•• Low chair or bench where they can sit to put on their shoes and take
them off
Note: If we have more than one child, we may choose to have one basket
per child.

Living room

•• Low two- or three-tier shelves for activities. If we have more than
one child, we can use lower shelves for the younger child’s activities
and higher shelves for older children’s activities. Be sure the higher
shelves are out of reach of the younger sibling, or use containers that
the younger child cannot manage to open. For reference, the shelves
in my classroom are 40" long by 12" deep by 15" high (120 cm by 30
cm by 40 cm).
•• Small table and chair, preferably by a window—cut the legs down if
needed so the child can put their feet flat on the floor. For example,
the chair seat height would be around 8 inches (20 cm) and the table
height around 14 inches (35 cm).
•• Easy-to-roll floor mats (around 27 inches by 20 inches, or 70 cm by
50 cm) stored in a basket and used to mark a space for their activity.

68

Kitchen

•• Low shelf, cupboard, trolley, or drawer with a small number of childsized plates, cutlery, glasses, and place mats
-U
 se real glasses, plates, and cutlery—children will learn to carry
these items with care if they are aware that the items may break.
We can remind them that glass is fragile and to use two hands
(rather than saying, “Don’t drop the glass”).
•• Stepladder or learning tower or kitchen helper so the child can reach
the kitchen counter to help (alternatively, bring food preparation
items to the dining table or a low table)
•• Child-sized cleaning materials
- broom, mop, small dustpan, and brush
-h
 and mitts (cloths where the hand fits inside; easy for a child to use
to wipe up spills)
- sponges cut to fit their hands
- dust cloth
- child-sized aprons
•• Child-sized kitchen implements for food preparation
- apple cutter and corer
-m
 etal juicer with arm to pull down, orange squeezer or electric
juicer to squeeze orange juice
- l ittle spreaders that toddlers can use easily to spread their favorite
topping onto small crackers (stored in a container)
•• Cutting implements
- start with nonserrated butter knives for cutting soft items such as
bananas
- offer a crinkle cutter for firmer fruits and vegetables
- i ncrease difficulty as the child’s skills build, for example, sharper
knives may be introduced with a cutting guide as they become
preschoolers (with supervision)
•• Water source so the child can help themselves to a drink—a water
dispenser that they can reach, a low sink, or a little water in a small
jug on a tray (with a sponge or cloth at the ready for spills)
•• Easy-to-open containers with nutritious snacks—put out only as
much food as we are happy for them to eat between meals. If they
choose to eat it right after breakfast, the snacks are done for the day.
•• Measuring cups and spoons, a scale, and mixing spoons for baking
•• Spray bottle and squeegee for cleaning windows
•• Small watering can, if there are indoor plants
Note about safety: Keep sharp knives out of reach and show the child
how to use them when they are ready; be available to supervise.

69

Eating area

•• For snack time, children could use their low table and chair, and
encourage them to keep food at the table (don’t let them walk around
with food).
•• At mealtimes, I like to sit together as a family at the kitchen/
dining table. Look for a chair the child is able to climb in and out of
independently, like a Stokke chair or one similar to it.
•• Have a child-sized jug on the table at mealtimes with a small amount
of water or milk so children can help themselves—fill with only as
much as we are prepared to clean up.
•• Have hand mitts or sponges at the ready for spills.
•• A small basket can be used to carry items from the kitchen to set the
table. If we are setting the dining table for the meal, we may need a
stepstool for our child to be able to reach the table.
•• A place mat with a guide where to place the plate, cutlery, and glass
can be useful for a toddler. One of the parents in my classes had the
great idea to photograph her child’s favorite set, print it on lettersized paper, and laminate it—a perfect guide for the child to use
when setting the table.
•• Some (handpicked) flowers on the table make mealtimes a special
occasion every day.

Bedroom

•• Floor mattress or toddler bed that the child can climb in and out of
by themselves
•• If space allows, a small shelf with a few activities for them to quietly
play with when they wake
•• Book basket or shelf
•• Full-length mirror—helps the child see their full body schema, and
aids dressing
•• A small wardrobe with shelves, drawers, or hanging space that the
child can reach. Or use a basket with limited choices of seasonally
appropriate clothing to choose from each day. Store out-of-season
clothing out of reach to avoid potential battles.
•• Ensure the room is completely childproof—cover electrical sockets,
remove any loose wires, put curtain cords (which present a choking
hazard) out of reach, and install child locks on windows.

70

Bathroom

•• A changing area. Once they are standing, children wearing diapers
often don’t like to be laid down to be changed. Instead, we can
change them standing up in the bathroom to introduce them to the
idea that this is where they will use the toilet. We can also start to
offer the potty or toilet as part of the changing routine (more on
toileting in chapter 7).
•• Low step to help them to reach the bathroom sink and to climb into
the bath
•• Small bar of soap or a soap pump they can manage by themselves to
wash hands
•• Toothbrush, toothpaste, hairbrush within the child’s reach
•• Mirror at the child’s height or accessible to them
•• Basket for dirty/wet clothing (or in the laundry area)
•• Low hook or towel rack for the child to have access to their towel
•• Small travel-sized bottles for body wash, shampoo, and conditioner
that the child can learn to use. Refill them each day with a small
amount if they like to squeeze bottles.

Arts and
crafts area

•• Access to art materials—for example, a small set of drawers with
pencils, paper, glue, stamps, and collage items
•• As the child gets older, we can include access to scissors, tape, and a
stapler.
•• Choose fewer but higher-quality art materials.
•• For toddlers, activities can be set out on trays with everything at the
ready—for example, one tray for drawing and one tray for gluing.
•• Around 3 years, the child will start to enjoy collecting things
they will need. Then we may have a tray they can use to select art
materials by themselves from a display.
•• Make putting things away easy: a place for artwork to dry; a place for
scraps of paper that can be reused; a place for recycling.
•• Toddlers are mostly interested in the process, not the product, so
here are some ideas for finished artwork:
-U
 se office “in-trays” for things they want to keep or come back to;
once the trays are full, glue a selection of favorites in a scrapbook.
- Keep a record of artwork that is too bulky to keep by photographing it.
- Reuse the artwork as gift paper.
- Encourage children to work on both sides of the paper.
-M
 ake a gallery to feature some of the child’s artwork. For example,
have frames where the work is rotated, a string or wire where work
is hung up, or magnets on the fridge.

71

Cozy place
for reading

•• Have a forward-facing bookshelf or ledge so the child can easily see
the cover of the books. Or use a book basket.
•• Display only a few books and change the selection as needed.
•• Provide a beanbag, cushions, low chair, or cozy floor mat.
•• Near the window gives lovely light to read by.
•• Make a cozy space in an old wardrobe by removing the wardrobe
doors, or have a pup tent to crawl into.

Outside

•• Create opportunities for movement activities: running; jumping;
skipping; hopping; brachiating (swinging like a monkey); sliding;
dancing; swinging on a rope, an old tire, or a regular swing
•• Gardening—small rakes, trowels, garden forks, wheelbarrow
•• A small vegetable garden they can help care for. If we are able to
grow vegetables in a raised garden bed, in pots on a balcony, or
inside, they will also learn to appreciate their food by seeing where
it comes from and how long it takes to grow and nurture.
•• A place to sit or lie quietly to watch the clouds
•• Water—a bucket of water and a paintbrush to “paint” the bricks or
concrete pavers, spray bottles to wash windows, a water table, a water
pump
•• Sand pit
•• Labyrinth with small rocks to make a path
•• Place by the door where they can put on outside shoes or brush off
their shoes to come inside
•• Baskets and jars for making (seasonal) nature collections
•• Digging in dirt, making mud, reconnecting with the earth
•• Huts or tunnels made from willow branches
•• Create secret paths for the child to explore
There are many sources of inspiration for our outside spaces. I love
seeing “natural playscapes” where natural elements are incorporated
into the design. For example, a slide built into a slope in the yard, or
paths made from natural rocks or found materials. For inspiration, look
up Rusty Keeler, who creates such natural playscapes for children.
Note: If there is no outside space at home, look to provide such
possibilities at a nearby playground, woods, beach, lake, or mountains.

72

AT- H O M E S TA R T E R S E T FO R M O N T E S S O R I TO D D L E R S
Here are eight basic pieces of equipment to introduce Montessori at home at
very little expense.
1

2

4

6

3

5

7

8

1. small table and chair 2. low shelf 3. bookshelf/book box 4. low bed/floor
mattress child can get into themselves 5. low stool for reaching sink, toilet,
and so on 6. low hooks with cleaning equipment 7. stepladder/learning
tower for helping in the kitchen 8. low hooks for coat and bag by the entrance

73

G E N E R A L P R I N C I P LE S
TO K E E P I N M I N D
Tackling the clutter
Some may be thinking, I could never keep such a tidy house. We have too many things.
The first step is to reduce the number of toys, books, and arts and crafts materials, and
the general mess that accumulates in our homes. Place into a box the activities and toys
our child is not using very often or things they are finding too difficult. This box can be
stored for now; we can rotate and reintroduce these activities when our child needs a
new challenge. Place into a second box items that are for younger children, activities that
they do not use anymore or are too easy. Find a new home for them or keep them aside
for a younger sibling.
Keep out just the few things the child is using a lot. It’s about continually finding the
right number of activities to keep the toddler engaged without holding on to ones that
no longer capture their interest.
This will be an ongoing process that will eventually include our child, developing ideas
about reusing, recycling, charity, and taking care of our toys with the idea that they can
be passed along when we are ready for something new.
Toddlers do not let go of items easily. Get them used to the idea that the items are going
into a box for charity or for another family. Offer them one last turn to play with an
item; they can put it into the box when they are all finished. They can then help you
carry it out of the house to deliver it. And if the box can’t be delivered straight away,
remove it from view so the child doesn’t have to repeat the parting process.

For those interested in adopting an even more minimalist
approach at home, I recommend looking up Marie Kondo,
the author of The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up. She
recommends keeping only those things in our homes that bring
us joy or are useful. Imagine applying the same principle to our
child’s activities and clothing. And always saying “thank you” to
the things we no longer need or use before letting them go.

74

Making it cozy
Getting rid of clutter does not mean that our home should be without character. We
can place cushions, blankets, plants, and artwork at the child’s height. Choose natural
materials for baskets and carpets to add warmth.
Our homes are adapted to the country and time we live in. With varied family origins,
we may display treasures or furniture from these other cultures, in addition to
incorporating their rituals and traditions.
I love adding handmade elements like paper bunting, hand-knitted or hand-sewn items,
or other crafts that we have created together. These details make a home distinctive and
special, something that our child will absorb and cherish.
Vintage items can also make a home unique and full of personality without feeling
overly cluttered.
All these elements make a house a home, with the goal of making the space feel calm,
warm, and accessible to our child.

Setting up our home to save us work
Raising toddlers can be a lot of work, and we can get pretty tired. So we can also set up
our homes to make things easier for them and, consequently, for ourselves.
Arrange things so children can manage more independently and successfully. Have
things they need at their height, so that they’re easily accessible. Remove items that are not
suitable for them to touch. Keep adjusting and improving, particularly as the child grows.
Susan Stephenson, an experienced Montessori teacher, shared this story with me. She
would note each time a child asked for help in her class and then set up a way the child
would be able to help themselves the next time. So if the child asked for a tissue, a tissue
box could be placed at the child’s height; if they pulled out all the tissues, a small basket
could hold a few tissues carefully folded, ready for use.
Remember, we want our homes to be “yes” spaces that are safe for our toddlers to
explore. When we find ourselves saying “no”—for example, when our child is touching
something dangerous or banging on glass—we can look for ways to set up the space
to remove the temptation. We can cover an electrical outlet that is proving tempting,
move furniture to block places we don’t want them to explore, use child safety locks on a
cupboard we don’t want opened, or put a fragile glass cabinet into storage until our child
is a little older.

75

If we can’t make the whole home safe, we can at least make one area a “yes” space where
our child can play freely, perhaps with a baby gate across the door. (We still want them
to be able to move a lot, so avoid playpens, which will limit their movement.)

Sharing spaces
If we have more than one child, here are some extra things to consider:
•• Set up spaces for different ages
-U
 se lower shelves for activities for the younger child or for any age; use higher
shelves for activities with smaller parts more suitable for the older children.
- S tore small parts in containers that are difficult for younger children to open.
-E
 stablish a place or two where each child can go to be by themselves. This can be as
simple as making a hiding place with two chairs and a blanket. We can even hang a
sign on the outside that says “Private” and point to it when their sibling comes close.
We can tell them, “It says private. It looks like they want to be alone right now. Let’s
find something else to do.”
- I f a younger sibling is interfering, try to simplify the activity so they are able to
participate.
•• Sharing toys
-C
 ome up with a plan for how toys and activities will be shared. (See chapter 7 for
more information on sharing.)
•• Sharing a room
-P
 ersonalize each child’s area with, for example, a shelf above their bed with personal
items, photos, and collections.
-P
 rovide privacy if needed, perhaps using a curtain to divide the room.
-M
 ake clear agreements about using the space, like when to turn the lights off.
- S et up the space so each child can be alone somewhere.

Small spaces
It’s easy to think that it would be easier to apply these principles if we had a larger home.
However, it is possible—and perhaps even essential—to use these ideas if our home is
smaller. We want to make the best use of the limited space available, which otherwise
becomes easily cluttered and overwhelming. I see limitations like small spaces as
opportunities for creativity.

76

Here are some ideas to help:
•• Use bunk beds/high beds, or store beds away during the day using Japanese-style
futon mattresses.
•• Buy multifunctional furniture or get rid of some furniture to create space to play.
•• Look for light-framed, less bulky furniture and use a neutral palette to give a feeling
of more space.
•• Keep fewer things on display at a time to keep the space from feeling cluttered.
•• Use space on the walls (such as pegboards to hang craft materials) or underused
spaces for storage (under beds, for example), or disguise cabinets for storage near
the ceiling (perhaps by painting them the same color as the wall).

TH E I M P O RTA N C E O F TH E
H O M E E N V I RO N M E NT
These ideas should help inspire us to reduce the chaos and create more engaging spaces
for our child.
Other benefits include:
•• Encouraging the child to take part in daily life
•• Aiding their independence
•• Providing peaceful, nurturing, and creative spaces for the whole family
•• Helping build the child’s concentration with less clutter and fewer, more focused
activities
•• Allowing the child to absorb and appreciate beauty
•• Beginning to show them how to be responsible for their things
•• Helping them absorb the culture(s) in which they live
Setting up our home can help to create some calm in our life with our child. I hope these
ideas serve as inspiration to make a few changes today. We can always continue to work
on our homes, gradually making things even more accessible, more attractive, and more
engaging for our child.

77

TO P R AC T I C E
1. Can we provide
- child-sized furniture?
- beauty, for example, with plants and art?
- ways for our child to be independent?
- attractive activities?
- less clutter?
- a place for everything and everything in its place?
- storage?
2. Can we see the space through our child’s eyes?
3. Can we make a space in each room of our home for our child?

78

79

H O M E TO U R

Au stria
Now it’s time to be inspired by
the home of Anna, from Eltern
vom Mars.

Let’s take a look at Anna’s
Montessori home in Austria.
Everything is set out at the
child’s height, and the space is
simple and beautiful. The child
has everything in its place and
at the ready. The simple color
palette is so calming. Can we
please move in?

80

S E LF - CA R E A R E A
This small self-care area is simple and attractive. Here
the child can blow their nose, wipe their face, or brush
their hair. A low stool holds two baskets, one with
tissues and the other with a hairbrush. A small basket
underneath is for dirty tissues. The mirror hung vertically
allows the child to see their full body and is perfect for a
quick check as they leave the house.

81

A RT S A N D C R A F T S A R E A
This arts and crafts area is set up for an older toddler. The
open shelves are inviting and accessible, and the use of
trays and containers makes it easy to see what is available.
The pencils on the top shelf look attractive, set up by
color in simple DIY glass jars with a sticker for each color.
Small pots contain beads and thread for threading
activities; materials like washi tape, a hole punch, and
scissors are at the ready; marker pens are displayed in a
see-through container; and paintbrushes and watercolor
are also available.
A plant softens the space, and a music player is available
for the child to independently select music.
A small table and chair are next to this shelf where the
child can use these materials (not pictured).

82

K ITC H E N
A low drawer in the kitchen allows the child to help
themselves to food preparation tools.
Cutlery is held in jars, and baskets hold a rolling pin,
whisk, and peeler. Also available are a small grater, juicer,
egg slicer, and apple cutter/corer.

83

OUTSIDE
A paved area has been transformed into a beautiful
outdoor space to explore.
We can see a broom and gardening tools hung
on hooks at the ready, alongside a watering can and
bucket. Potted plants are fun to water, and vertical space
has been used for more plants.
When the weather allows, this area is also used for
working with other activities, simply using a small
breakfast tray or sitting at a table and chair.

R AI S I N G A CU R I O U S C H I LD
WHO FEELS SEEN AND HEARD

PA R T O N E

EN CO U R AG I N G CU RI OSIT Y
IN OUR CHILD
86	Five ingredients for curiosity
86	Trust in the child
87	A rich learning environment

5

87	Time
87	A safe and secure base
88	Fostering a sense of wonder
88	Seven principles for curious humans
88	Follow the child
89	Encourage hands-on learning
90	Include the child in daily life
91	Go slow
92	Help me to help myself
94	Encourage creativity
96	Observation

PA R T T W O

ACCEPTI N G O U R CH I LD
FOR WHO THEY ARE
99	Give toddlers significance, belonging,
and acceptance for who they are
100	Be their translator
101	Allow all feelings, but not all behavior
102	Give our child feedback instead of praise
104	Roles and labels

86

PA R T O N E

E N CO U R AG I N G CU R I O S IT Y
I N O U R C H I LD

As we discussed in chapter 2, Montessori teachers do not believe a child is a vessel to be
filled with facts. The child genuinely loves learning, making discoveries for themselves,
and coming up with creative solutions.
As parents we can also encourage curiosity in our children at home with five ingredients.

F IV E I N G R E D I E NT S FO R CU R I O S IT Y
1. Trust in the child
Dr. Montessori encourages us to trust that the child wants to learn and grow—and that
the child intrinsically knows what they need to be working on to develop as they should.
This means that if we provide them with a rich environment to explore, we don’t need to
force them to learn or be worried if they are developing “differently” from their peers.
We can trust that they are developing along their unique path, in their unique way, on
their unique timeline.
We can also trust them to learn the limits of their bodies for themselves. Toddlers are
curious learners who want to explore the world around them. There may be accidents
along the way that we cannot prevent (and maybe that we should allow to happen). After
all, that is how they learn. And we will be there if they want to be held. “Ow. Was that a
shock? It’s hard to see you hurt yourself. I’m so glad your body is made to heal itself. Isn’t
it amazing?”
Are we constantly worrying about how our child is developing or whether they will hurt
themselves? Can we practice setting aside those worries about the future and enjoy where
they are today, on their unique journey?

87

2. A rich learning environment
For a child to develop curiosity in the world around them and a desire to learn, we must
provide a rich learning environment and time to explore it.
This rich learning environment does not have to be filled with expensive materials.
Explorations in nature can be totally free, dropping a chain or string into a cardboard
tube can cost nothing, and sorting out some dried beans can cost very little.
What we learned in chapter 3 about activities was to keep observing our child and offer
them opportunities to practice what they are mastering right now.
What does our child’s environment look like—the physical, the social, even the adults
around them? Does it provide them with rich opportunities for exploration?

3. Time
For children to develop and follow their urge to discover, explore, and wonder, they need
time. Time that is unscheduled. Time that is not rushed. Even times when they feel bored.
Allow time to explore. Allow time for movement. Allow time for language and
conversation. Allow time for building connections. Allow time for wonder and curiosity.
Whether we work or are with our child full-time, let’s think creatively about our days and
weeks. Can we change things to carve out 15 to 30 minutes of unscheduled time every day?
Perhaps an hour or two on the weekend? What commitments can we let go of?

4. A safe and secure base
As a parent we can provide physical and emotional safety and security. We keep
our child physically safe from electrical outlets, busy roads, and other dangers. We
childproof our homes, or at least one area of it, so that our child can freely explore.
Emotionally we can give them safety, too. We can accept them for who they are. And
they can trust us to be there for them even when they are having a hard time.
This safety and sense of security allow the child the freedom to be curious in the world.
Are there ways to show our child that we are there for them, even (and particularly) when
they are having a hard time? Are we able to look them in the eye and acknowledge the big
feelings they are having about things that seem small to us?

88

5. Fostering a sense of wonder
We can ask our child questions about the world we see, invite them to explore with all
their senses, and get out into nature as often as possible.
Are we modeling wonder for our child? Do we allow them to explore with all their senses?
Do we use nature to inspire a sense of wonder in our child?

S E V E N P R I N C I P LE S FO R CU R I O U S H U M A N S
When we ensure these five ingredients are available to our child, they have a strong base
from which to become curious about the world around them and develop the ability to
think and do things for themselves.
With a foundation of the five basic ingredients, we can apply seven principles to help
them become curious human beings.
1.	Follow the child—let them lead.
2.	Encourage hands-on learning—let them explore.
3.	Include the child in daily life—let them be included.
4.	Go slow—let them set their own pace.
5.	Help me to help myself—let them be independent and responsible.
6.	Encourage creativity—let them wonder.
7.	Observe—let them show us.
Let’s take each one in turn to explore how they can help us bring Montessori into our
daily lives.

1. Follow the child
“It is the child’s way of learning. This is the path he follows. He learns
everything without knowing he is learning it . . . treading always in the paths
of joy and love.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, The Absorbent Mind

89

We have already talked about how important it is to let the child lead, to not interrupt
when the child is focusing deeply on something (as much as possible, at least), and to
follow their interests. But I don’t think it can be repeated too many times. This is the root
of the Montessori approach.
This may mean that we choose to go for a walk and let the child lead. We stop and go at
their pace.
It may mean that we talk about lighthouses a lot, go and visit lighthouses, read books
about lighthouses, and make a model lighthouse with our child if that is their current
area of interest.
It may mean getting things ready in the evening if our child is not a morning person.
Following the child means following their unique timeline, seeing where they are today,
and not imposing our idea of what they should be learning when.
Let me be clear. Following the child is not permissiveness, allowing them to do
whatever they like. We will set limits when needed, ensuring the safety and care of
themselves, their environment, and others.
But it is not being directive either. When we hear ourselves giving commands, giving
lessons, or giving too much information, may we remember, Ah, yes. How can I find a
way to step back and let them lead?
We do have to do things, though, we often think. We have to get dressed; we have to get to day
care; we have to have dinner; we have to have a bath. We will still make these things happen,
but in a way that allows us to “follow the child.” We can learn to work with our child rather
than doing something to them like bribing, threatening, or punishing them. We will look
into ways we can set limits and cultivate cooperation with our toddler in chapter 6.

2. Encourage hands-on learning
Toddlers learn best when they touch things, smell things, hear things, taste things,
and see things. To raise curious learners, look for ways to provide hands-on, firsthand
experiences for them.
When they start to ask questions, instead of simply giving them the answer, we can say,
“I don’t know. Let’s find out together.” Then we might be able to do a small experiment
or explore together, like getting out a magnifying glass to let them take a closer look. Or,
we may visit the zoo, go to the library to find some books, or ask a neighbor who knows
more about the topic.

90

Our toddlers are learning that if they don’t know something, they can be resourceful
and find it out, often in a hands-on, concrete way.
At home, they will explore their environment by touching and feeling things. Instead of
saying, “No, don’t touch,” we can observe the skill they are practicing and look for a way
to redirect it toward an activity that is more appropriate. If they are taking the books
off the bookshelf, we can put them back so they can practice it again and again. Or, if
we don’t feel like playing that game, we can think of other things they can empty, like
a collection of scarves in a basket. When we find them exploring our wallet and taking
out all our cards and cash, we can prepare some other containers in a basket for them to
open and close and find things inside. In our classroom we even have an old wallet with
some of my old loyalty cards and library cards.
Again, nature is a great place for hands-on and sensorial learning, from the wind or sun
on their face, to the sand or soil in their fingers, to the sound of the waves or the crunch
of the leaves, to the smell of the sea or the leaves in the woods.

3. Include the child in daily life
Toddlers are curious about what we are up to. They want to be a significant member of
the family. They are not just trying to drive us crazy by clinging to our leg.
In chapter 3, we looked at many practical day-to-day activities in which we can include
our toddlers.
Maybe we get them to help with food preparation. We can invite them by saying, “We
are getting dinner ready. Which part would you like to do?” They can hand us things, or
we can get a stepladder for them to join us in the kitchen, have an apron on a hook that
they can wear, get them to wash their hands, have them tear some lettuce for the salad,
have them rinse the leaves. Let them wander off if they lose interest.
Rather than thinking, I have to do the laundry, we can think of it as an activity to do
together. I remember when my son was a toddler, I would hold him up so he could reach
the buttons for the washing machine. He would often help me unload the items and
then play around with the clothespins as I hung up the clothes. (There could be a low
clothesline where children can hang clothes, too). We were lucky to be living in Australia
at the time, where we had space for an outdoor clothesline. My daughter would lie on a
little mat and kick around and watch us as we all chatted. Some days it nearly looked like
domestic bliss. Most days it looked a bit more like organized chaos, but it was a lot of fun.

91

Having young children involved does mean that it’s messier and slower. But we are
making connections and memories that will last a lifetime. Those of us struggling with
fitting this into our days and weeks with work and life commitments can start with
moments when we do have time. This might mean setting aside an hour or two each
weekend when you stay home and do laundry together, or a baking project, or care
for the plants and garden. Recognize that on weekdays, we may not have the time or
patience to let our children help cook, but they can be involved in setting the table,
pouring their own drink at dinner, and taking their plate to the counter after the meal.
We can start with the things we enjoy the most and would love to do with our children.
For more ideas, revisit the list of “practical life activities” in chapter 3 or the activities
list in the appendix.

4. Go slow
“Be fast when it makes sense to be fast, and be slow when slowness is called
for. Seek to live at what musicians call the tempo giusto—the right speed.”
—Carl Honoré, In Praise of Slow

With toddlers, the “tempo giusto” will often be a lot slower than we are used to. Toddlers
do not like to rush (except if they see a large open space, and then they will need to run).
Stop and look at the cracks on the pavement together, and enjoy the process rather than
the product. Going slowly gives our child time to explore and be curious. And we would
do well to learn from them. They remind us to slow down and be present. We can let go
of making mental checklists and worrying about the past or future, too.
If we want their cooperation, we are well advised to go slowly. This means practicing not
saying, “We’re late again!” every morning. We will stress them out. They will resist. We
will be even later. (Some ideas on how not to be late are on page 142.)
If we live more slowly, then in those occasional times when we need to rush—for
example, to catch a bus or because we missed our morning alarm—our child will be a
lot more accommodating. When rushed every day, our child may tune out our requests
when we really need their help.

92

5. Help me to help myself
“Help me to help myself” is an expression often used in Montessori. It means:
•• setting up things for our child to be successful by themselves
•• stepping in as little as possible and as much as is necessary, then stepping back for
our child to continue to try
•• allowing time to practice
•• showing our acceptance and support
How to teach our child skills

Break the task into small steps and show them very slowly. Toddlers will pick it up
faster if we don’t talk at the same time we’re showing them. Simply say, “Look!” and
demonstrate with slow, clear movements.
Scaffold skills

I love how Montessori materials in a classroom build on each other as the child works
through them from simple to more complex, each skill building on the next.
We can apply the same principle to teaching our child to do things themselves at home.
We scaffold skills as the child gains competence and maturity. The skills will become
more difficult or have more steps or require them to follow multistep instructions.
For example, first we can show them how to put their foot in their shoe. Next we can
show them how to pull the Velcro to tighten the shoes. Once they master that, they can
learn to push down on the Velcro to fasten them. Then we invite them to put on their
shoes all by themselves.
Allow time

When we allow enough time in our daily routine, we can help children help themselves.
For example, we can let them get dressed at their own pace. That doesn’t mean allowing
unlimited time, but it might mean allowing ten to fifteen minutes while we sit on the
floor with a cup of tea nearby, so we can relax and enjoy the process of helping our child
learn to get dressed.
We can also practice on a rainy day, for example, letting our toddler take off their socks
and put them back on, and take them off and put them back on.
These daily activities can provide moments of connection and opportunities for
learning, when our child learns to do things for themselves and becomes confident
in their own abilities.

93

If we start to feel frustrated when it is taking too long, rather than getting irritated,
we can acknowledge that this time we are going to help them, and try again tomorrow.
Be friendly about mistakes

“Nothing can take away initiative as fast as when we redo something that
they did.”
—Jean K. Miller/Marianne White Dunlap,
The Power of Conscious Parenting

Mistakes are simply opportunities to learn. Our children will make mistakes, break and
spill things, and even hurt someone sometimes. Or when they offer to help, they may not
do the task as well as we would have done it ourselves.
Instead of punishing, lecturing, or correcting them, try this:
1. 	If they get the name of something wrong, we can make a mental note that they don’t
know it yet. We can teach it again at another (neutral) time. They will be more open
to learning it later than they will if we correct them. In Montessori we have a phrase
for this: “Teach by teaching, not by correcting.”
2. 	If they break or spill things, we can have supplies at the ready for them to help clean it up.
3. 	We can support them while they make it up to someone they have hurt.
4. 	We can model not taking ourselves too seriously when we make mistakes and show
them that we apologize. “I’m sorry. What I should have said is . . .” or “What I should
have done is . . .”
Offering help

Rather than rushing in to help our toddler, we wait to see how much they can manage
themselves. If they are stuck or the task is difficult or new, we can offer help.
“Would you like me or someone else to help you do that?”
“Would you like to see how I do it?”
“Have you tried . . . ?”
Then we help only if they want it.

94

6. Encourage creativity
“The more experience a child has with real purposeful activity and solving
problems, the more useful, creative, and effective her imagination will become.”
—Susan Stephenson, The Joyful Child

There is a common misconception that the Montessori approach does not support and
encourage children’s creativity and imagination. Reasons cited include the fact that
Montessori materials are for a specific purpose rather than being more open-ended, that we
do not have a pretend-play corner in our classrooms, and that we do not encourage fantasy
in children under 6 years old (rather, we focus on the concrete world around them).
Imagination is different from fantasy

Fantasy means making up something that does not exist in reality. Children under 6
don’t easily perceive the difference between something that is made up and something
that is real. In a research study, “Do Monsters Dream? Young Children’s Understanding
of the Fantasy/Reality Distinction” by Tanya Sharon and Jacqueline D. Woolley, young
children were shown fantastical and natural pictures of animals. The 3-year-olds had
difficulty distinguishing real from fantastical scenes.
We may witness this when a child is scared by something in books or other media, from
dragons and monsters to images they see on the news. It can feel very real to them.
Imagination, on the other hand, is used when our mind takes the information we have
collected and comes up with creative possibilities. In Montessori, we lay the foundation
for our child in the first years in reality, planting the seeds for their life as creative and
imaginative citizens of the world. To establish a strong foundation, we can provide our
children with hands-on experiences in the real world in the early years. Around 2.5+
years, we will see our child begin with pretend play. This is a sign that they are processing
what they see around them (imagination). They play families, bake us cookies, and pretend
to be the schoolteacher. They are being creative without becoming overwhelmed by the
idea of dragons, monsters, or other things they can’t see or experience directly (fantasy).
When providing materials for such play, we can keep the items less prescriptive—scarves
and other objects can be used in many ways, whereas a firefighter’s suit can be used in
only one way.
The focus on reality won’t limit their creativity; it will enhance it. We can see the
groundwork flourish in adolescence when the imagination becomes particularly strong
and they start to come up with creative solutions to our world problems and for social
change.

95

What about artistic creativity?

As we discussed in chapter 4, we can provide a rich and inviting area for artistic
creativity. We can:
•• Set up beautiful materials at our child’s height.
•• Create invitations for creativity—beautiful trays with age-appropriate materials to
explore.
•• Make beauty part of our home, including art and plants, which they will absorb and
be inspired by.
•• Choose quality over quantity when it comes to the materials.
In addition, there are key principles that we can practice to support our child’s
development of their artistic creativity. We can:
•• Invite open-ended use of materials (use fewer art kits and coloring books, which are
more prescriptive).
•• Prepare ourselves to encourage creativity—allow time and be open to allowing mess
and exploration; prepare a space that is okay to get dirty; relax, join in, and create
together.
•• Ask, not tell. Rather than instructing our child, we can encourage exploration.
•• Allow boredom. When we have unscheduled time in our day to sit without anything
planned (and without technology to entertain us), our child has a chance to be
bored. Their mind can wander and daydream, they can come up with new ideas, and
they can make new connections. When the mind is bored, it seeks stimulation and
becomes increasingly creative.
•• Look at the process, not the result. Focus on our child’s effort by describing their
effort. “You made big circles.” “I see you mixed these two colors.”
•• Show our child that there are no mistakes in this work. We can experiment and learn
when things don’t turn out the way we expected.
Most of all we can have fun inspiring, exploring, and creating with our child.

96

7. Observation
Often Montessori teachers will tell parents, “Just observe your child.” Observe what
about my child? Why? And how?
Observing is seeing or perceiving without any judgment or analysis. It means being just
like a video camera, which objectively records the situation and doesn’t analyze what is
being seen.
For example, a Montessori teacher might make the following observation about a
student: “John releases the pencil from his right hand. It falls to the ground. He looks
out the window. He transfers his weight from the left foot to the right foot. He bends his
knees. He picks up the pencil using his thumb and index finger of the right hand.”
By observing, we are scientifically recording what we see rather than rushing to react or
making any assumptions. With the information, we can respond rather than react.
We see more details, we notice when something changes, and we practice taking the
judgment away from what we see. It allows us to see the child with fresh eyes every day.
What to do with these observations?

These observations will help in many ways.
We learn to see that our child is developing in their own unique way. We are able to
follow their interests and keep them curious about the world around them.
We may hold back before stepping in, seeing opportunities instead of limiting their
curiosity and creativity. And we also see those occasions when we need to step in calmly
to keep them safe.
When we observe over a period of time, we will begin to observe subtle differences about
our child that we might otherwise miss.
We can also identify factors in the environment or with the adults that help or hinder
independence, movement, communication, or other areas of development.
Observing helps us support our children to be the curious learners they are. Observing
enables us to look at our child clearly and without judgment or a preconceived idea of
what they are capable of.

97

SO M E TH I N G S WE CAN O B S ERVE
FINE-MOTOR SKILLS

EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

•
•
•
•

•
•

How they grasp and hold objects
Which fingers and which hand they use
The grip they use on a paintbrush or pencil
Which fine-motor skill activities and skills
they are practicing, such as using their
pincer grip, threading, and so on

•
•
•

When the child cries, smiles, and laughs
How they get comforted or comfort
themselves
How they respond to strangers
How they deal with moments of separation
How they manage when things do not go
their way

GROSS -MOTOR SKILLS

•
•
•
•
•
•

How they come to stand or sit
How they walk—distance of legs or arm
movements
Balance
The gross-motor skills they are practicing
Whether they choose activities that use
gross-motor skills
Whether the environment helps or
hinders their movement

COMMUNICATION

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Sounds/words they make to communicate
Smiling
Crying—intensity, duration
Other body language
How they express themselves
Eye contact during conversations
Language used
How they are responded to when they
communicate

COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

•
•
•

What they are interested in
What they are practicing and learning to
master, and the activities they can complete
How long they play with an activity

SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

•
•
•
•

Interactions with others—peers and adults
Whether they observe others
How they ask for help
How they provide assistance to others

EATING

•
•

What they eat and how much
Whether they are passive or active
eaters—being fed or feeding themselves

SLEEPING

•
•
•
•
•

Any sleep patterns
How they fall asleep
Quality of sleep
Position during sleep
How they transition to waking

INDEPENDENCE

•
•

Signs of independence
Relationship to adults

CLOTHING

•
•
•

Whether the clothing helps or hinders
movement and independence
Whether they try to put on and take off
their own clothing
Whether they express preferences for
their clothing

SELF- OBSERVATION

•
•
•
•

Record our communication—what we say
and how we interact with our child
If anything comes up for us as we observe
our child
How we respond if our child does not eat
or sleep
What we say when our child does
something we like or don’t like

98

I N G R E D I E NT S A N D P R I N C I P LE S
FO R E N CO U R AG I N G CU R I O S IT Y

FIVE INGREDIENTS

SEVEN PRINCIPLES

1.

Trust in the child

1.

Follow the child

2.

A rich learning environment

2.

Encourage hands-on learning

3.

Time

3.

Include the child in daily life

4.

A safe and secure base

4.

Go slow

5.

Fostering a sense of wonder

5.

Help me to help myself

6.

Encourage creativity

7.

Observation

99

PA R T T WO

ACC E P TI N G O U R C H I LD
FO R W H O TH E Y A R E

Toddlers want to feel significant, they want to feel like they belong, and they want to be
accepted for who they are. If we understand this, we can move away from doing battle
with them or being triggered by them, and move toward being able to guide, support,
and lead them.

G IV E TO D D LE R S S I G N I F I CA N C E , B E LO N G I N G ,
A N D ACC E P TA N C E FO R W H O TH EY A R E
Seeing the world through our toddler’s eyes helps us see their perspective. This is
similar to empathizing with, or having compassion for, our child. Whichever we choose,
we recognize that everyone is right in their own eyes.
If our child grabs a toy out of another child’s hands, they are not trying to be naughty.
If we look at it from their perspective, we can see they simply want to play with that toy
right now. Then we can observe them, see if they need any help, or be ready to step in if
needed.
We may think our child is being destructive because they are pulling the soil from the
potted plants, but when we look from their perspective, we can understand that they
are seeing something in their environment at their height that needs to be explored
right now. We can observe them and decide if we need to step in to remove the plant or
perhaps cover the soil.
Instead of thinking that our child is trying to wind us up by poking out their tongue
at us and then laughing, we can look from their perspective. They are testing out a new
sound, seeing our reaction, and figuring out cause and effect. Again, let’s observe and see
if they stop all by themselves. Or we may come up with something else that is okay and

100

say something like “I don’t like it when you poke your tongue out at me, but we can go
and tumble on the carpet over here.”
When we stop to observe and remove the judgment, it opens us up to be able to see our
child and accept them for who they are.
When we ask, “How can I get my child to be less shy/concentrate more/be more interested
in art/be more active?” and so on, we are not accepting them for who they are. Instead,
we can work to show our child we love them just as they are, where they are right now.
Really, that is what anyone wants.
Significance. Belonging. Acceptance for who we are.

B E TH E I R TR A N S L ATO R
When we can see things from our child’s perspective, we can also be their translator
when needed, as though we’re looking up what they are trying to say in a dictionary.
“Are you trying to tell me . . . ?” is a useful phrase for translating the toddler’s needs
into words.
When they throw their food on the floor, we can say, “Are you trying to tell me you’re
all finished?”
We can also use this for an older child who is calling people names or acting
inappropriately. “It sounds like you are pretty angry right now. Are you trying to
say you don’t like it when they touch your things?”
And we could translate for our partner or the child’s grandparent if we notice they
are getting upset. “It sounds like it is important to your mother/grandfather to sit at
the table to eat, and you really want to walk around with your food.”

101

SOMETIMES
OUR JOB IS TO
BE OUR CHILD'S
T R A N S L AT O R

A LLOW A LL F E E LI N G S , B UT N OT A LL B E H AVI O R
We might think, If I accept them for who they are, see things from their perspective,
and allow all their feelings, do I have to accept all their behavior?
This is absolutely not the case. We step in if necessary to stop any inappropriate
behavior. As the adult, we often need to act as our toddler’s prefrontal cortex (the
rational part of their brain), which is still developing. We can step in to keep them
safe. To keep others safe. To keep ourselves safe. To show them they can disagree
with others in a respectful way. To show them how to show up and be responsible
human beings.
Examples:
“It’s okay to disagree, but I can’t let you hurt your brother/sister. You sit on this side of
me, and you sit on the other.”
“I can’t let you hurt me/I can’t let you speak to me that way/I cannot let you hurt
yourself. But I see something important is going on, and I am trying to understand.”

102

G IV E O U R C H I LD F E E D BAC K
— I N STE AD O F PR AI S E
Montessori teachers like to help children build their own sense of self, learn how to
accept themselves for who they are, and learn what feels good in the way they treat
others.
Since the 1970s and ’80s, there has been a big push for parents to praise their child to
build the child’s self-esteem. So we hear parents saying, “good job,” “good boy,” “good
girl.” In Dutch, they even have a phrase: “goed zo.” We say it in response to everything.
We praise children for their paintings, for flushing the toilet, we applaud them, and we
declare every physical feat a triumph.
These types of praise are extrinsic motivators that do not come from within the child
themselves.
Alfie Kohn wrote a useful article, “Five Reasons to Stop Saying ‘Good Job!’” in which he
points out that:
•• Praise can actually be used to manipulate children when we use it as a bargaining
tool to motivate them.
•• It can create praise junkies.
•• Praise can actually take the joy away, with children looking to us for reassurance
rather than experiencing delight at what they have achieved.
•• Children can become less motivated when they do something for praise, because it
removes the meaning for themselves.
•• Praise can lower achievement—when an activity is tied to the pressure to perform,
the child’s interest or pleasure in the activity goes down, or they take fewer risks.
Montessori teachers believe instead that a child will learn to behave if we help to develop
their intrinsic motivation—their internal radar that tells them that something is right
(or wrong) and recognizes what helps (or hurts) themselves or someone else.

103

What we can say instead . . .
It can be surprising at first how often we find ourselves saying “good job.” When we start
to be conscious of it, we can choose to change it. When looking for alternatives, the best
guide is to think about what we would say to another adult when giving them feedback.
Here are some ideas that I first learned from the book How to Talk So Kids Will Listen
and Listen So Kids Will Talk by Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish. What I love about these
suggestions is that they let the child know more specifically what we appreciate and give
the child vocabulary that is so much richer than simply “good job.”
1. Describe what we see

Focus on the process rather than the product and describe what our child has done.
Give feedback by using positive and factual descriptions of the child’s actions and
accomplishments.
“You took your plate to the kitchen.”
“You look really pleased with yourself.”
“You got dressed all by yourself.”
“You put the blocks in the basket and put them back on the shelf.”
“You used blue and red paint. I see a swirl over here.”
2. Sum it up with a word

“You packed your bag and are ready to go to the beach. Now, that’s what I call
independence!”
“You helped your grandma with her bag. Now, that’s what I call being thoughtful.”
“You wiped up the water on the floor with the mop without me asking. That’s what I call
being resourceful.”
3. Describe how we feel

“I am so excited for you.”
“It’s a pleasure to walk into the living room when everything has been put away.”

104

RO LE S A N D L A B E L S
Another part of accepting a child for who they are means seeing them without any
preconceived judgments or ideas about them.
As the adults in their lives, we need to be careful about labeling our children.
We likely have someone in our life who has been labeled “the clown,” “the shy one,” “the
naughty one.” Even positive labels can be difficult to always live up to (e.g., “the clever
one,” “the athletic one”).
These labels can last a lifetime—something the child never grows out of.
Instead, we can give them another view of themselves. Recall stories with them of times
when they have been successful in difficult areas. Let them overhear us tell someone how
they worked hard to overcome an obstacle. For example, we can say, “I liked watching
you carry that glass so carefully to the table with two hands,” to a child who might
otherwise be labeled clumsy.
Labels are commonly used with siblings, too. Once a new baby is born into the family,
a young child suddenly becomes the “big brother/sister.” It is a huge responsibility to
have to behave all the time and show their sibling how to be a “big kid.” Instead of
always leaving the eldest in charge, for example, while we are in the bathroom, we can
get children to look after each other, regardless of their age. We can make sure that
younger children also take on age-appropriate responsibilities rather than leaving
everything to the eldest.

105

Let’s see our toddler and accept them for who they are. In moments of celebration. And
when they are having a hard time. Every day.
Allowing our child to be curious and giving them a sense of significance, belonging,
and acceptance provides a solid foundation of connection and trust with our child—
something we will need to cultivate cooperation and when we have to set limits with
them.
Without connection, we get very little cooperation; without trust, setting limits
becomes difficult.

TO P R AC T I C E
1.	How can we allow our child to be more curious?
- Does our child feel we trust them?
- Is there a rich learning environment?
- Do we allow time to let them explore and to go at their own pace?
- Is it physically and psychologically safe for them?
- How can we foster a sense of wonder?
2. 	Practice observing our child for ten to fifteen minutes a day.
- Be curious
- Be objective
- Avoid analysis
3. 	H ow can we give our child a sense of significance and belonging, and let them
know we accept them for who they are?
- See from their perspective
- Translate for them
- Give them feedback rather than praise
- Avoid roles and labels

N U RTU R I N G COO PE R ATI O N
AN D R E S PO N S I B I LIT Y I N
O U R C H I LD

6

PA R T O N E

C U LT I VAT I N G C O O P E R AT I O N
108	Why the Montessori approach does not use
threats, bribes, or punishments
110	Problem solving with our toddlers
113	Ways to involve our child
114	How we can talk to help them listen
116	Managing expectations
118	Bonus—Write a note

PA R T T W O

SETTING LIMITS
120	It’s okay to set limits
121	Be clear on the limits
122	Follow through with kind and clear action
125	Acknowledge negative feelings
126	Dealing with tantrums
128	Reconnecting once they are calm
128	Helping them make amends
130	Tips for setting limits
133	A handy checklist for limits

108

PA R T O N E

CU LTIVATI N G COO P E R ATI O N
WH EN YO U R C H I LD WO N ’ T LI STEN TO YO U
Cultivating cooperation in a toddler is a tricky thing. Toddlers are naturally curious,
they are impulsive, and they are servants to their will. Common ways of trying to get
cooperation from toddlers include threats, bribes, punishment, and constant repetition.
We find ourselves thinking, Why won’t they listen to me?
“If you’ve told a child a thousand times, and the child still has not learned,
then it is not the child who is the slow learner.”
—Walter B. Barbe

W H Y TH E M O NTE S SO R I A P P ROAC H
D O E S N OT U S E TH R E AT S ,
B R I B E S , O R P U N I S H M E NT S
The word discipline comes from the Latin word disciplina, meaning “teaching; learning.”
So we should consider what we are teaching our children and what our children are
learning from the way we discipline them.
Threats, bribes, and punishments are extrinsic motivations. The child may cooperate
to avoid a punishment or to get a sticker or some ice cream. But that kind of discipline
rarely has a long-term effect. It is a quick fix, if it works at all. It can also be a distraction
from the issue at hand.
I once got a detention at school for writing a mean note about the teacher (in my defense
she was scary, but I should never have called her a dragon). Of course, the teacher found
the note. I was so upset about getting a detention that I told everyone in the class that the
teacher was mean. Did the punishment work? Not at all. Instead of being sorry that I had
wronged the teacher, I felt that the teacher was the one who had done something wrong.

109

When we threaten a child with punishment like a time-out, we begin to erode the trust
between parent and child. Two things can happen. They can become scared of the adult
and cooperate out of fear, or they find a way to do what they want sneakily, without their
parent finding out.
Similarly, threats and bribes may get the child to cooperate, but not because the child
wants to help us. They simply want to avoid the negative consequences (punishment) or
take advantage of the positive ones (rewards). Threats and bribes may need to get bigger
and more elaborate as the child grows. If they have learned to do something only so
they’ll get a sticker, the “price” of their cooperation will rise.
These methods of getting our toddler to cooperate are exhausting. They place all the
responsibility on us, the adult. We are thinking, How am I going to get my child to get
dressed/eat/wash their hands? We end up nagging, and the child stops listening to us
altogether.
There is an another approach.
Each time we are challenged by our child, we can see it as a teaching opportunity for us
and a learning opportunity for them.
Let’s add to our toolbox for cultivating cooperation and look for ways to work with our
child to get them to cooperate (without losing our cool).
And let’s ask ourselves, How can I support my child right now?
Cultivating cooperation involves:
•• problem solving with our toddler
•• involving the child
•• talking in a way that helps them listen
•• managing our expectations
•• a little bonus
Note: We’ll need a foundation of connection and trust with our toddler to get their
cooperation. So when everything seems like a battle, it’s good to go back and review the
ideas from the last chapter.

110

P RO B LE M SO LV I N G
W ITH O U R TO D D LE R S
I like to start by finding a way to work with the child so they feel like they have some
control over the situation. Even though they are small, toddlers want to be involved in
how things happen.
The child is not in charge, but they can have input into how to solve problems. We can
ask, “How can we solve the problem?” and then come up with solutions together.
We might be coming up with most of the ideas, but the toddler is learning the process.
Don’t underestimate them. Sometimes they will come up with great ideas (often much
more creative than ours).
•• “You want to stay at the park and I’m ready to leave. I wonder how we can solve
the problem.”
•• “You’d like to finish that puzzle and then you’ll put on your shirt? Okay, I’ll go and
get dressed and come back to see if you’d like some help.”
•• “Two kids and one toy. I wonder how you’ll work that out.”
Even a preverbal child can help. For example, if a crawling sibling has taken one of their
toys, they might come up with the idea to bring their sibling another toy to play with.
If it’s a bigger problem, we can write a list of solutions. Include even silly ideas if they
come up. Then we can review the list together and find solutions that everyone can live
with. We can select one to try and set a time to come back to see if it is working or needs
to be adjusted a little. This process may not be quite so formal with a toddler, but they
are learning a practice that we can build on as they get older.
In addition, the toddler is more likely to take ownership of the planned solution and
follow through. It’s also a great skill for solving problems with others. (This is an idea to
come back to when we talk about siblings in chapter 7.)
When we get our toddlers involved in solving problems, we may even find we are more
relaxed. We get to share a little of the responsibility. We remain open and curious about
how it might happen in a way we may not expect, without forcing it.

111

Making a checklist with our child
One way to solve problems with toddlers is to make a simple checklist with them
(especially one with pictures).
If they resist getting dressed in the morning, we can make a morning routine chart of all
the steps they need to do to get ready. If bedtime is difficult, the list will include all the
things they need to do before bed, including drinking some water and using the toilet.
We can draw pictures of each step or take photos of them and print them out. If they
want to change the order each day, we can make sticky notes for each step or laminate
some pictures with Velcro on the back.
Then we can check the chart to see what we need to do next. That way it’s the chart doing
the work, not us. “Can you see what is next on the list?” or “The checklist says we brush
our teeth next.”
When they are involved in making and using the checklist, they take ownership of the
solution.

112

GO O D M O R N I N G CH ECKLI ST
MAKE BED
EAT BREAKFAST
GET DRESSED
BRUSH HAIR
BRUSH TEETH
SHOES/COAT ON

GO O D N I G HT CH ECKLI ST
EAT DINNER
BATH
PAJAMAS ON
BRUSH TEETH
DRINK WATER
USE TOILET/CHANGE DIAPER
STORY TIME
CUDDLES
SLEEP TIME

113

WAYS TO I N VO LV E O U R C H I LD
Give age-appropriate choices
We can offer our toddler choices to encourage cooperation. Not big decisions like where
they will go to school, but age-appropriate choices, like which color T-shirt they would
like to wear (out of two seasonally appropriate options); or when they are heading to the
bath, we can offer them the option of jumping like a kangaroo or walking on all fours
sideways like a crab.
This gives the toddler a sense of control over the situation and involves them in the process.
Note: Some toddlers do not like choices. Just as with any of these suggestions, use the
ones that work for the child and leave the rest.

Give them information
Rather than issuing commands—“Put the orange peel in the bin, please”—we can give
information instead: “The orange peel goes in the bin.” Then they can figure out for
themselves that they need to take it to the bin. It becomes something they choose to do
rather than another order from the adult.

Use one word
Sometimes we use too many words to give instructions to our children. “We are going
to the park. We’ll need to get our shoes. Our shoes protect our feet. It’s good to put them
on. Where are your shoes? Did you put them on yet?” And on and on it goes.
Try using just one word. “Shoes.” Again the child needs to figure out what they need to
do on their own, giving them some control in the situation.
We are also modeling respectful communication to our children. And they will pick this
up. One day my family was leaving the house, and we were all putting on our coats and
shoes by the front door—a pretty tight spot. My son (around 7 at the time) said to me,
“Mum. Laces.” I looked down, and indeed I was standing on his shoelace. He could have
rolled his eyes at me and said, “Mummmm, do you have to stand on my laces?” or worse.
It’s another reminder that what we do speaks louder than what we tell them.

114

Get their agreement
Getting our child on board and letting them feel like they’re part of the process will help
with gaining their cooperation. If we know that our child has trouble leaving the house
or the playground, we can let them know we’ll be leaving in five minutes. We can then
check to make sure they heard and make a plan with them. They may not understand
exactly how long five minutes is, but they learn the concept over time.
We could say, “I see you are working on this puzzle, and we are leaving in five minutes.
I’m worried you might not have time to finish it before we leave. Do you want to put it
somewhere safe to keep working on it when we get back, or do you want to put it away
and do it later?”
At the playground, we could say, “We have five minutes before we leave the playground.
What would you like to have one last turn on?”
I don’t love using an alarm to remind a child (used a lot, this could become an extrinsic
motivator). However, used from time to time it can be an effective way to get their
agreement, especially if they are involved in helping to set the timer. And, just like a
checklist, it’s the timer that tells them the time is up, not us.

H OW W E CA N TA LK
TO H E LP TH E M LI STE N
Use positive language
Instead of telling a child what not to do, we can tell them with positive language what
they can do instead. Rather than, “No running” (what they should not do), we can say,
“We walk inside” (what we would like them to do).
Instead of, “No, don’t climb,” we can say, “You can keep your feet on the floor or you can
go outside to climb.”
If we tell our toddler, “Stop yelling!” we may also be raising our voice. First, they will
mirror us and shout back; second, they will hear precisely what we don’t want them to
do. Instead we could say (perhaps in a whisper), “Let’s use our quiet voices.”

115

Speak with a respectful tone and attitude
Our tone of voice is a way to show our toddlers that we respect them. A whiny tone, an
insecure voice, a strict voice, or a threatening tone can distort the best of intentions and
does not show our child we value them and want to work with them.
If we can remember, it is helpful to check in with our voice and whether we are coming
from a calm place in our heart. (See chapter 8 for ways to calm ourselves down.) We can
even use a whisper now and then. Our toddler’s ears are sure to prick up.

Ask them for help
Toddlers want to be involved, so if we would like our child to come inside, we might be
able to ask for their help in carrying the keys or a heavy bag. At the supermarket, we can
get them to help by making a visual shopping list, which they can be in charge of (we
can cut out pictures from a food magazine together or draw simple pictures); let them
take the items off the shelf; or put them on the conveyer belt at the register.

Say “yes”
If we are saying “no” a hundred times a day, our child will gradually begin to ignore it
altogether. It is best to reserve “no” for times when their safety is a concern.
Instead of saying “no” to set a limit, we can generally find an alternative way to express
what we want to say by actually agreeing with them and saying “yes.”
Say a toddler wants another cracker but they haven’t finished their first one. We could say
in a gentle tone, “Yes, you can have another cracker . . . when you have finished this one.”
Or maybe if there are none left, “Yes, you can have more . . . when we go to the store. Let’s
write it on our shopping list.”
It takes some time to break this habit. It can be useful to note down all the times we say “no”
and then brainstorm (perhaps with a friend) some more positive ways to respond next time.

Use humor
Children respond well to humor, and it is a lighthearted way to encourage cooperation.
Sometimes when I’ve been helping a child get dressed and they are resisting, I pretend to
put their shoe on my foot. The child laughs and tells me, “No, Simone, it goes on my foot.”
And they put it on.

116

Humor is particularly useful when we are on the verge of losing our temper. Something
as simple as singing a silly song can relieve some tension for us and coax a smile from
them. It’s a simple way to start fresh.

If our child is going through a “no” phase, adjust our language
It is easy to know when a toddler is in this phase. Ask them if they need to use the toilet,
if they will get dressed, if they want chocolate, and they’ll just say “no.”
During the “no” phase, we may want to adjust our language to tell them what is happening,
rather than asking them. We might say, “It’s time to eat/have a bath/leave the park.” This
can still be done with respect, using a gentle voice and kind words, but as their leader.

Show them
Sometimes we might need to actually get up to show them what they need to do rather
than repeating ourselves from the other side of the room. If they are still not sure what
to do with the orange peel, we could go over to the bin and physically touch or point to
it, saying, “It goes in here.” Show them.
Actions speak louder than words.

M A N AG I N G E XP EC TATI O N S
Have age-appropriate expectations and be prepared
We cannot expect our toddler to behave in the way we like all of the time. Sitting quietly
in a doctor’s waiting room or in a cafe or on a train can be very difficult. Remember that
they have a strong will to explore, move, and communicate, and are very impulsive. This
is not meant to excuse their behavior. However, it does mean we can prepare ourselves.
First, we may need to adjust our expectations—we may not get to read a magazine, check
our phone, or make a phone call. In a cafe or restaurant, be prepared to take them for a
little walk when they start to get agitated or loud, perhaps to see the chef at work or look
at the fish tank together. Waiting for a plane, we can stand at the window of the airport
and watch all the action happening outside to prepare the plane for departure.

117

Second, be prepared. Don’t forget to pack plenty of water, food, a few favorite books, and
a little zippered pouch with a few favorite toys—a couple of small vehicles, a bottle with
a coin to drop in, some shells, and so on. If there are any delays wherever we may be, we
will be prepared to support our child and help them cooperate.

Try to wait until they have finished their task before making a request
If a toddler is busy working on a puzzle and we ask them to get ready to leave, they often
won’t respond. We may think, They never listen to me!
When I put myself in a similar situation—perhaps someone interrupts me while I am
right in the middle of answering an email—it can be irritating. I just want to finish what
I am doing, and then I can give 100 percent of my attention.
So if we want our child to come eat their lunch or to remind them to use the toilet,
whenever possible, we can try to wait until they have finished what they are working on
and then ask them before they start the next thing.

Allow time for processing
It can take a toddler (and older children, too) a while to process what we say.
Maybe we ask them to put on their pajamas and get no response. We can try counting
slowly to ten in our head. Not aloud. This is for our benefit, to help us wait for them to
process what we have said.
By the time I get up to three or four, I would definitely have repeated myself already, and
by seven, I would have asked another time. By the time I get to eight or nine, often I find
that the child is starting to respond.
It’s not that they aren’t listening; they are just processing what we said.

Keep a daily rhythm
Do not underestimate how much a toddler likes having the same rhythm every day.
We can use that to manage expectations: wake up, get dressed, eat breakfast, leave the
house, lunchtime, nap time, dinnertime, bath time, get ready for bed. It does not have to
be on a fixed schedule, but the more regular the routine, the less resistance we will get.
(See chapter 7 for more on daily rhythm.)

118

BONUS
Write a note
Most toddlers can’t read yet, but notes can still be very powerful. We can write a note
that says “No climbing” and place it on the table. Then we can point to the note and say,
“It says, ‘No climbing.’” If it is written down, it gives a certain weight and authority to
the message. It is the sign setting the rule rather than the adult having to repeat the rule.
And it is always consistent.
We can use a note in the kitchen if the oven is at the toddler’s height. When we turn on
the oven, we can show our child that we are putting up a note saying “HOT” to remind
them the oven is on and dangerous to touch.
Notes are very effective, even with prereaders. But use them in moderation. If notes are
stuck everywhere, they will definitely lose their effectiveness.
Another way to use notes is to keep a notebook. If our child is upset about leaving or
something is not going their way, we can write it down in a notebook and perhaps draw
a picture. This acknowledges to the child that we have heard them. Sometimes that is all
they need.

119

I D E A S FO R
CU LTIVATI N G CO O P E R ATI O N

PROBLEM SOLVING WITH OUR TODDLER

•

Ask, “How can we solve the problem?”

•

Make a checklist.

INVOLVE THE CHILD

•

Give age-appropriate choices.

•

Give them information.

•

Use one word.

•

Get their agreement.

TALK IN A WAY THAT HELPS THEM LISTEN

•

Use positive language.

•

Speak with a respectful tone and attitude.

•

Ask them for help.

•

Say “yes.”

•

Use humor.

•

If our child is going through a “no” phase, adjust our language.

•

Show them.

MANAGE EXPECTATIONS

•

Have age-appropriate expectations and be prepared.

•

Try to wait until they have finished before making a request.

•

Allow time for processing.

•

Keep a daily rhythm.

BONUS

•

Write a note.

120

PA R T T WO

S ET TI N G LI M IT S
H ELPI N G O U R C H I LD TAK E R E S P O N S I B I LIT Y

Cooperation can be cultivated without resorting to threats, bribes, and punishments.
But if our child is still not cooperating, then it’s time to learn about setting limits.
This is the most difficult part of caring for a toddler in a Montessori way. We want to
give them as much freedom as possible to explore so they remain curious, but within
limits to keep them safe, to teach them to respect others, and to establish our own
boundaries.
In the Netherlands, I notice that the Dutch people (generally speaking, of course) seem
to do this very naturally. I don’t see many Dutch parents or caregivers getting into a
battle with their toddler or having exchanges that end up with the adult shouting at
them. From time to time, I see a young child crying on the back of their parent’s bike,
yet the parent remains calm, continuing where they need to go, and offering some
comforting words to the child.
I’m going to show how to do the same, to set limits in a respectful way for both the child
and the rest of the family.
It will take some practice. We are basically learning a new language. It can be easier to
learn if we are able to get support from other people raising their children in a similar
way so we can learn from one another and discuss tricky moments. And when we
get it wrong, we can remind one another that we are doing our best and use it as an
opportunity to apologize to our child.

IT ’ S O K AY TO S ET LI M IT S
When my children were small, I thought my job was simply to make them happy. To be
honest, that’s the easy part. As parents we are here to help them deal with all life will
throw at them: to be there to celebrate with them, to help them deal with moments of
disappointment and grief—the good and the bad.

121

Sometimes we need to set limits. To keep them safe. To show them how to be respectful.
To step in when they are not making a positive choice. To help them grow into
responsible human beings.
Setting limits can feel difficult. Our child may not be happy with the limit being set. Yet
when we set a limit in a supportive and loving way, they learn to trust that we have their
best interests in mind, and the connection with our child can even grow stronger.
Difficult times make us grow. Difficult times make our children grow. And how amazing
that our children know that we love them even when they are having a tantrum, pulling
our hair, or refusing to get dressed.

B E C LE A R O N TH E LI M IT S
S E T G RO U N D/H O U S E R U LE S

Children, toddlers especially, need order. They need to know what to expect. They need
to know that things are consistent and predictable. That their parents will keep them safe
and secure. That they will get the same answer whether their parent had a full night’s
sleep or the baby woke them every hour on the hour.
It’s a good idea to have a few rules that are important to the family. Too many rules and
it will be like a dictatorship. But it’s helpful to have a few simple and clear rules aimed
at keeping everyone safe and living more peacefully with others—just as we have some
agreed-upon rules and laws for living together in the larger society.
How many of us already have some ground rules in our home? Maybe stuck on the
fridge? Maybe a list of family values framed on the living room wall? Or maybe simply
discussed between the adults of the household?
When I ask this question in my parent workshops, I find that most participants don’t
have any ground rules at all. That means we are mostly just winging it—making it up
on the spot. This can be difficult to keep track of, for us and definitely for our toddler.
Imagine if they changed the rules for traffic lights and some days the red light meant
“stop” and on other days it meant “go.” No wonder toddlers get mixed messages when we
change our minds.

122

Here are some ideas for rules that we could use at home, adjusting for what works for
each family:

Examples of ground/house rules
•• We are kind to each other. This means that even if we disagree, we will not hurt each
other physically or tease each other; it teaches children to respect themselves and
each other.
•• We sit at the (dining) table to eat. This is a practical rule that prevents food from
going everywhere in the house. It also reminds people that eating is a social occasion
and that we don’t play and eat at the same time.
•• We contribute to the household. No matter what our age, we help around the house,
and our help is valued.
•• We engage in rough play by mutual consent. This is a mouthful for young children,
but they understand its meaning. If someone says “Stop,” they are saying that they are
not having fun anymore and the game needs to stop.
These ground/house rules provide a foundation that we can always return to. We may
need to revise them as our children grow. Not in the middle of an argument, though.
Do it at a neutral (ideally, planned) moment.

FO LLOW TH RO U G H W ITH K I N D A N D C LE A R AC TI O N
“If you say it, mean it. If you mean it, follow through with kind and firm action.”
—Jane Nelsen, Positive Discipline: The First Three Years

If, despite our best efforts to work with our child, our child refuses to cooperate, then we
take kind and clear action.
Let’s say they do not want to have their diaper changed, they are throwing their food,
or they won’t leave the playground. Then we acknowledge their feelings. But we take
action. We are the leader—a respectful leader.
We touch gently if we need to handle them. We pick them up if we need to, giving a
short explanation as we go. We change their diaper. We help them bring their plate to
the kitchen. We leave the park. We are setting clear, loving limits for our child.

123

Make it logical and age appropriate
The consequence should be directly related to the behavior. Young toddlers cannot
follow the logic where there is no direct relationship. It doesn’t make sense to them that
if they don’t listen, they won’t be able to go to the park or have ice cream later.
I once was on an airplane and heard a father say to his son, “If you don’t behave, we will
turn the plane around and go home.” That’s a threat that is going to be very difficult to
follow through on.
Also, no stickers—seriously. That is just a bribe.
Instead, find a logical consequence. Let’s say they are throwing the ball inside, and we
have asked them to stop. A logical consequence would be for us to put the ball away and
let our child try again later.
Let me share an example from when my children were a little older but one that gives a
clear example of logical consequences and following through.
My children were around 7 and 8 years old and sitting in the bakfiets (a bike here in the
Netherlands where there is a box in front with enough room for up to 4 children to sit).
They were irritated with each other and encroaching on each other’s personal space.
They started stomping on each other’s feet, and it was hard for me to concentrate on
cycling, so I asked them to stop. When they continued, I quietly pulled my bike over to
the side of the road and asked them to get out. We were going to walk until they were
ready to sit in the bike calmly.
It was hard to follow through with kind and clear action. My children were pretty angry
at first, but I kept an even tone. “Yes, you sound upset that we had to get out of the bike.”
Gradually they calmed down. After walking for a bit, I asked if they were ready to try
again. I don’t remember them ever stomping on each other’s feet in the bakfiets again.

Express the limit clearly
I feel most comfortable setting limits with language like “I can’t let you . . .” or
“I’m going to . . .” It’s clear. It takes ownership of our role as the parent. And it is
respectful to both child and parent. We can also make sure they hear us by going to
them and getting down to their level.
•• “I can’t let you take that toy out of their hands. I’m using my gentle hands to take
your hands away.”
•• “I can’t let you hit that child. I’m going to separate you.”

124

•• “I’m going to put a pillow here to protect you from hurting yourself.”
•• “I’m going to put you down. If you need to bite, you can bite on this apple.”

No need to explain the limit every time
Once the child knows the limit, we don’t need to explain it at length every time.
Let’s say that our child throws food at every mealtime. We find ourselves having the
same conversation over and over—how we can’t let them throw food, that food is for
eating, and so on. We do not need to get into a negotiation or give them lots of chances.
If the behavior continues, it’s a reminder to talk less and move to kind and clear action.
We can say, “It looks like you are all finished. Your plate goes in the kitchen.” (See page
146 for tips on food throwing.)

Set limits for safety
If our toddler is doing something dangerous, we must step in and take them out of danger.
This is the one time I say “no.” This helps to get their attention when there is danger.
Some things I consider dangerous: touching something hot, going near an electrical
outlet, running onto the road, getting too far ahead in the street unattended, climbing
near a window.
Pick them up, say, “No, I can’t let you touch that,” and remove them from the area.
We may need to continue to repeat this if they keep going back. In that case I would look
to see if I could change the environment to remove or hide the danger. Place a box over
the power outlet, move a couch in front of wires, or move a glass cabinet to a room with
a door that locks.

If they laugh
It is difficult if they laugh when we set a limit. I would still continue to follow through with
kind and clear action. They may be used to getting a reaction from us. Instead, stay calm
and say, for example, “You want to have fun right now, but I can’t let you hurt your brother.”

125

AC K N OW LE D G E N EGATIV E F E E LI N G S
They will probably be unhappy about a limit being set, so we acknowledge their feelings
and see things from their perspective.

Guess their feeling
I have learned from Nonviolent Communication to guess what a child might be feeling
rather than simply naming it.
•• It looks like you . . .
•• Are you telling me . . . ?
•• Are you feeling . . . ?
•• It seems like . . .
•• I’m guessing you might feel . . .
Ask them if they are disappointed, make guesses about how they feel (“Are you telling
me you’re upset we are leaving the park?”), or describe how they look (“You look really
angry right now”).
You may guess the wrong feeling, but that’s okay. They will just shout back something
like, “I’m not!” or “I’m just disappointed.” You have still helped them clarify their feelings.

Sportscasting
We can also use the sportscasting technique that I first heard about from Janet Lansbury,
author of No Bad Kids and Elevating Child Care. Just as a sportscaster gives commentary
about a football game, we can describe what is happening in a factual way (just as we do in
observation). This can give us some emotional distance during this difficult moment, allow
us to observe and name what we see, and stop us from jumping in to solve the problem.
“You are holding on to the swing. Your hands are holding tight. I’m using my gentle
hands to help you let go. I’m holding you close to me as we leave the park.”

Let the big feelings out
We can also acknowledge their feelings when things don’t go their way, like when they want
to wear something that isn’t available or appropriate. Let them rage, hold them if they’ll let
us or keep them safe if they won’t, and offer them a hug once they have calmed down.

126

Let them release the full range of emotions. Allow even ugly feelings. Show them we are
able to love them at their worst. Once they are calm, we’ll be able to help them make
amends if needed.
Tip
I’ve noticed that once toddlers have processed their feelings and are calm, they often
take a deep breath or release a big sigh. We can look for this kind of physical sign to
show they are completely calm again.

D E A LI N G W ITH TA NTR U M S
When a toddler has a tantrum, they are communicating that something did not go their
way. They are having a hard time. They may have done something wrong, but right now,
the first thing to do is help them calm down.
I love the analogy used in the book The Whole-Brain Child by Daniel Siegel and Tina
Payne Bryson—when a child is upset, he “flips his lid.” This means that the upstairs part
of the brain—the cerebral cortex, the part of the brain that makes rational decisions and
allows for self-control—is not available to the child.
Therefore, all the reasoning in the world or explanations will fall on deaf ears. We need
to first help them close the lid by giving them support to calm down.
We can offer them a cuddle; we don’t assume that they want one. Some children like to be
cuddled to help them calm down. Some children will push us away. If they push us away,
we make sure they are safe and we can offer them a cuddle when they are calm.
We are saying it’s okay for them to melt down. Rather than trying to get the tantrum
to stop as soon as possible, allow them to express all their feelings safely until they are
calm, and show that we are there to help if they need us. And, once they are calm, we
can help them make amends if needed.
That’s it.
It may happen in the street, in the supermarket, in the park. That’s okay. Move them out
of the way (if you can). Give them the time they need to calm down. We try to stay calm
as well and refrain from trying to speed it up or distract them. Let them get it out.

127

When my son was around 2 years old, he had a tantrum that lasted about 45 minutes
because he did not want to get dressed. He raged, he was angry, then he was sad, then
he was embarrassed. He went through the full range of emotions. Gradually his cries
slowed. He took a deep breath. “I’m ready to get dressed now.” I stayed calm and our
connection was maintained (and maybe even strengthened, because he knew I would
love him even when he was upset).
If I had needed to leave quickly that day, I would have helped him get dressed using my
hands as gently as possible and calmly applying the sportscasting technique mentioned
earlier: “Are you having a hard time getting dressed? You can dress yourself, or I can help
you. I see I’ll need to help you. Yes, you are pulling your arm away. You don’t want to put
it in. I’m gently putting your T-shirt over your head. You are trying to push it off. Thanks
for telling me that this is difficult.”

Should I ignore a tantrum?
I have heard people suggest that it is better to ignore a tantrum completely. The idea is
that helping children or giving attention to behavior we do not like or want means we are
encouraging them.
I don’t agree.
Imagine if I had a bad flight and told my friend that my luggage was lost, I was disappointed
with the airline, and I hadn’t gotten any help at all. If my friend ignored me and walked out
of the room, I’d think they didn’t care about me. I’d be angry with them because I had just
wanted them to listen, help me calm down, or maybe ask if I’d like some space.
Ignoring the tantrum directs our child’s feelings at us instead of at the problem that
upset them. It creates a conflict just when they need connection.
Calm and kind acceptance encourages them to express their feelings. Over time, they
will find healthier forms of expression, but they will not be scared to share their feelings
with us because they will know that we are capable of being kind and calm even when
they have feelings that are big and scary.

Setting up a calm space
In Positive Discipline: The First Three Years, Jane Nelsen talks about setting up a calm space
for an older toddler around 3 years old, a place with some of their favorite things where they
can go anytime they need to calm down. This is different from a time-out because the child
can decide to go there and how long they would like to stay, and it is never used as a threat.

128

Instead, if we see them getting worked up, we can suggest it to them. “Would you like
to go to your calm place to calm down?” or “Shall we go to your calm place together?”
If they refuse and we want to calm ourselves down, we could say, “I think I’ll go to the
calm place myself.” If they come out and are still fired up, we can kindly and calmly
suggest that they might like to go back until they are feeling calmer.
The aim of this step is not to say that we accept their behavior. It’s to help them first calm
down.

R ECO N N EC TI N G O N C E TH E Y A R E CA LM
Once they are calm, they will be able to talk about what happened. We can offer a hug or
wait for them to ask for one. We can then acknowledge their feelings and see things from
their perspective. “Wow, was that difficult for you? You really didn’t seem to like that.
You looked furious.”

H E LP I N G TH E M M A K E A M E N D S
“When everyone has calmed down, any damage should be addressed. Thrown
items can be picked up, torn papers gathered and discarded, or pillows stacked
back on the bed or sofa. Adults may offer to help a child with these tasks. It
may also be appropriate to help your child repair additional damage, such as a
broken toy . . . a very real way to learn about making things right.”
—Jane Nelsen, Positive Discipline: The First Three Years

Once our child has calmed down, we can help them make amends. This teaches them
to take responsibility for their actions and is a very important step. Restorative justice
(“How can we make this better?”) is preferable to punishment (taking something away).
Yes, accept all their feelings (even the ugly ones) and help them calm down. Then once
they are calm, we help them take responsibility for their behavior.
If we do this too soon before our toddler has calmed down, they will resist and will not
want to make it better. That’s why it is best to make sure they are calm first. Then they are
really learning how to make it up to someone.

129

D E A LI N G W ITH TA NTR U M S

UNDERSTAND TRIGGERS AND AVOID THEM IF POSSIBLE

•

Frustration

•

Anger or rage when things don’t go their way

•

Wanting to be in control

•

Trouble communicating as their language may still be limited

HELP YOUR CHILD CALM DOWN

•

Offer a cuddle—rub their back, hold them, sing to them as they go through
the range of emotions, from anger to intense frustration to sadness and
sometimes regret.

•

If they push you away, make sure they are safe and not harming themselves,
something, or someone. Stand nearby and keep offering help. “I’m here if you
need some help calming down. Or we can have a cuddle when you are ready.”

•

If they are throwing toys at their sibling or trying to hit you, remove them so
that everyone is safe. “I can’t let you hit me. My safety is important to me.
Would you like to hit these pillows instead?”

OLDER CHILDREN

•

For a child over 3 years old, you can set up a “calm place” to use when they
are upset, such as a tent with pillows and their favorite things or a corner with
some trains.

•

You can ask them if they would like to go to their calm place. If they come back
still in a rage, we can gently tell them that they look like they still need to calm
down and can come back when they are ready.

MAKING AMENDS—DON’T SKIP THIS STEP

Once they are calm, I help them make amends. For example, if they drew on the
walls, they can help clean up; if they broke their brother’s toy, they can help to fix it.
In this way, they learn to take responsibility when things go wrong.

130

How to make amends
If our child hit someone and they are calm again, we can help them see if the other child is
okay, get a tissue for the other child, ask if they want to apologize, or some combination.
I often use an example from when my children were older to show how children can learn
to make amends on their own over time. My daughter had a friend come to our house for
a sleepover. My son was feeling a little left out and set the alarm in their room to go off at
4:00 a.m. When I heard them in the morning, my daughter and her friend were furious
because the alarm had woken them up in the middle of the night. I stepped in to offer
a little guidance, acknowledging both my sons feelings of being left out as well as the
girls anger at having been woken. In the end, they worked out that he would make them
breakfast, and he was very pleased with himself as he cooked them French toast. Needless
to say, when the same friend came for another sleepover, I asked him if he would wake
them again. He was quick to say he wouldn’t, and it hasn’t happened again.

Modeling making amends
If they are still young, we can model it for them. “Let’s go and see if our friend is okay.”
“I’m sorry my child hurt you. Are you feeling okay?” Modeling is more effective than
forcing them to apologize if they don’t mean it, having them mutter “Sorry” under their
breath, or having them say it in a sarcastic tone.
We can model apologizing when we forget things, if we let people down, or if we bump
into someone accidentally. We can model making amends to our child when we have
regrets about how we have handled a conflict with them. As they grow, our child will
learn to genuinely apologize.
For me, helping children to take responsibility when they have done something wrong
is the most difficult part. Yet this is one of the most essential parts of helping these seeds
grow into respectful human beings.

TI P S FO R S ET TI N G LI M IT S
Set limits early
It is difficult to be respectful to our children when we allow them to go beyond our
limits. When we give too much. When we try to be accommodating and let them have
too much freedom. We end up losing our temper and getting angry.

131

If we start to get uncomfortable about something our child is doing, we can step in early
to set a kind and clear limit without losing our patience or shouting.
Or perhaps at first we feel okay with something they are doing but then notice we are starting
to get irritated. It’s not too late. We can say, “I’m sorry. I thought I was okay with you throwing
the sand. I’ve changed my mind. I can’t let you throw the sand.” (If they become upset, see
page 125 for tips on acknowledging negative feelings and dealing with tantrums.)

If we are getting upset
Remember that we are our child’s guide. We cannot be a very good guide or leader when we
get upset ourselves. They are looking to us for direction. If we are feeling upset by a difficult
situation, it is likely that our toddler has a problem and is making it our problem. Our job
is to support them while they are having a hard time. We do not need to fix it for them.
•• When we are working really hard to get our child to eat dinner, they have made it our
problem.
•• When we are working really hard to get our child to get dressed, they have made it
our problem.
•• When we are working really hard to get our child to leave the playground, they have
made it our problem.
Let them work it out—with our support.
•• Provide nutritious meals for our child, but let them control how much they eat.
•• Use a checklist to help set up a system with our child to get dressed, but take them out
in their pajamas if they do not want to cooperate.
•• Let them know we are leaving the playground in five minutes. Don’t change the plan and
stop to talk to another parent. Keep leaving the playground, helping them if needed.

Consistency
One last note on consistency. Toddlers are trying to make sense of the world around them.
They will test limits to see if they are the same every day (often more than once a day). It
really helps them when we know our limits. They learn that when we say “no,” we mean
“no.” We are reliable, we are trustworthy, and we have their best interests in mind.
If we say “no” but then change our mind because they keep nagging and nagging, they will
quickly learn that this works. This is what psychologists call intermittent reinforcement. If
they get a different response one time, they will keep trying.

132

If we are not sure, we can say, “I’m not sure” or “Let’s see.”
Note: We can question why we say “no” in the first place. If we end up giving them the
ice cream after they have nagged, perhaps we could have just said “yes” at the beginning
and avoided being inconsistent.

TO P R AC T I C E
1. How can we cultivate cooperation with our child?
- Is there a way to solve the problem with them?
- Is there a way to give them a choice?
- Is there a different way in which we could speak?
- Do we need to manage our expectations or theirs?
- Can we write a note?
2. 	W hen we set limits, are we kind and clear?
- Do we have clear house/ground rules?
- Is the child learning something?
3. 	D o we acknowledge their negative feelings to help them process their emotions?
4. 	D o we help them make amends once they have calmed down?

Children need parents who will show them they love them by:
•• accepting them 100 percent for who they are
•• giving them freedom to explore and be curious
•• working with them to cultivate cooperation
•• setting limits so that they are safe and learn to become respectful and responsible
human beings
Let’s be our child’s guide. They don’t need a boss or a servant.
“The liberty of the child ought to have as its limits the collective interest of the
community in which he moves; its form is expressed in what we call manners and
good behaviour. It is our duty then to protect the child from doing anything which
may offend or hurt others, and to check the behaviour which is unbecoming or
impolite. But as regards all else, every action that has a useful purpose, whatever it
may be and in whatever forms it shows itself, ought not only to be permitted, but it
ought to be kept under observation; that is the essential point.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, The Discovery of the Child

133

A H A N DY C H EC K LI ST
FO R LI M IT S

IS THERE CLARITY?

•

Have a few house rules.

•

Be consistent with the limits.

IS THERE LOVE IN OUR LIMITS?

•

Get down to their level.

•

Use a clear and loving voice.

•

Manage our own anger first.

•

Give respect and understanding if they are sad or frustrated.

•

Be there to hold them or keep them safe if they lose control.

IS THERE REASON BEHIND THE LIMIT?

•

Is it connected to their safety or respect for others, their environment, or
themselves?

•

“Because I said so” is not a good enough reason.

IS THE LIMIT APPROPRIATE FOR THE CHILD’S AGE AND ABILITY?

•

Limits can be revised as our child grows.

DOES IT INVITE CHILDREN TO FIND SOLUTIONS?

•

Sometimes the best ideas are found by children themselves.

PUT TI N G IT
I NTO PR AC TI C E
PA R T O N E

D A I LY C A R E
136	Daily rhythm
138	Rituals
139	Getting dressed and leaving the house
143	Eating

7

147	Sleeping
150	Brushing teeth

PA R T T W O

DEALING WITH CHANGES
151	Toileting
154	Saying goodbye to pacifiers
155	Siblings

PA R T T H R E E

USEFUL SKILLS FOR OUR
TO D D LER S TO LE AR N
161	Sharing
162	Learning how to interrupt an adult
163	Skills for introverted toddlers
165	A hitting/biting/pushing/throwing phase
168	Building concentration
169	Dealing with frustration
170	When our child is clingy
172	Screen time
173	Bilingualism

136

PA R T O N E

DAI LY CA R E

I believe that we can take many of the daily struggles of life with a toddler and possibly
even transform them into peaceful moments of connection. Did I mention I was an
idealist?

DA I LY R H Y TH M
Toddlers thrive on regular rhythm. They like the predictability of knowing what is
happening now and what is coming next. It provides them with a feeling of safety and
security.
It does not have to be a fixed schedule kept to the exact minute. Rather, it can be valuable
to have our rhythm follow the same pattern every day. The child is then able to predict
what is coming next, which will minimize those difficult moments of transition. The
rhythm follows the child’s energy and interests. From time to time, it may well be
different. We can then know ahead that this may be difficult for them and prepare
ourselves (and our child) accordingly.

Moments of care = moments of connection
We spend a lot of our day caring for our toddler—helping them get dressed, eating meals
together, changing diapers or helping them use the potty, and giving them a bath. Rather
than seeing these daily care activities as something we need to get through quickly, we
can see them as moments of connection with our child.
These can be times to smile, make eye contact, talk to them about what is happening,
listen as they communicate (even if they do not yet have words), take turns in a
conversation, show respectful ways to touch, and have hugs.
They present many opportunities to simply live together. And live together simply.

137

A n ex a m p l e o f a d a i l y r hy t h m f o r a to d d l e r
•

Wake up

•

Play in bedroom

•

Cuddle with parent(s), read books

•

Use potty/change diaper

•

Breakfast

•

Get dressed, wash face, and brush teeth

•

Play at home/morning outing/visit market/leave for
day care (if applicable)

•

Lunch

•

Use potty/change diaper

•

Nap time/rest time

•

Use potty/change diaper

•

Play at home/afternoon outing

•

Afternoon snack

•

Get picked up from day care (if applicable)

•

Play at home

•

Dinner

•

Bath

•

Use potty/change diaper

•

Story time

•

Bedtime

138

R ITUA L S
Rituals in our family’s life can be used to mark moments and establish memories.
At special moments during the year we may wish to make some rituals around events
such as:
•• birthdays
•• holidays
•• seasons—seasonal crafts, food, outings
•• annual vacations
•• regular weekly rituals like going to the park on Friday afternoons or making a special
Sunday morning breakfast
Over time these rituals become familiar to our child, something to look forward to, and
are often the things our children will remember the most from their childhood. Just as
toddlers enjoy the predictability of daily rhythms, they love knowing what to expect
around these events.
If the parents come from different backgrounds, cultures, and nationalities, it’s an
opportunity to come up with a unique way to celebrate these origins and create special
new family traditions of our own.
Rituals may be created around the food we eat, the songs we sing, the people with whom
we celebrate, or the things we make, like seasonal displays in our home.
In a Montessori school, we create a special celebration for each child’s birthday. The
child walks around a representation of the sun the same number of times as the number
of years since their birth. This is a concrete way to show the passing of time and our
relationship on earth to the sun.
As a child, I always knew exactly what food would be prepared for our backyard
birthday parties and the party games we would play. Summer meant loads of mangoes
and cherries, wearing swimsuits all day, and running around barefoot in the grass (and
getting bindi-eyes—those horrible prickly weeds that grow in Australian grass—in my
feet). I’m feeling surprisingly nostalgic now, even for the bindi-eyes.
At the end of the year here in Amsterdam, our family has many traditions. On the first
of December, we make a homemade Advent calendar in which I hide little slips of paper
with something fun to do each day, like going for a nighttime walk to see the festive
lights, baking cookies, or making a craft. On December 5, we celebrate Sinterklaas

139

with the Dutch tradition of writing poems and making surprises for each other. Later
in the month during Hanukkah, we light some candles and sing “Maoz Tzur.” And
on Christmas Day, we exchange some presents and have a family meal. We keep each
of these pretty low-key, inexpensive, and not too elaborate. The emphasis is on being
together, rather than every moment having to be picture perfect.

For an in-depth look at some beautiful family rituals and
traditions, I recommend reading The Creative Family by Amanda
Blake Soule.

G ET TI N G D R E S S E D A N D LE AV I N G TH E H O U S E
Getting dressed and leaving the house no longer have to be battles. Instead, we can apply
the principles of guiding the child and finding ways to work with them, rather than
threatening or bribing them.
Again, getting dressed can be used as a moment of connection—even if we are a parent
who works outside the home.

Type of clothing
As our toddlers start trying to do things for themselves—“Me do it!”—look for easy
clothing they can manage themselves or with little assistance.
Good choices:
•• shorts and trousers with elastic waists that they can pull up without having to undo a
zipper and/or button
•• T-shirts with large openings for their head (or a press stud on the shoulder to open it
wider)
•• shoes with Velcro openings or buckles—easier than laces—or slip-on shoes
Avoid:
•• long dresses, which can be difficult for toddlers to manage and restrict their movement
•• overalls, which are difficult for the child to put on independently
•• skinny jeans or other tight and restrictive clothing

140

A place for everything and everything in its place
As we explored in chapter 4, we can set up our homes in ways to make things easier for
everyone. When we have a place for everything, then everything is (mostly) in its place
and easy to find. We are less likely to be frantically searching for a missing glove or shoe.
For example, in the hallway, it is helpful to have:
•• hooks for hanging coats and scarves
•• a basket for gloves and hats
•• a place for storing shoes
•• a place to sit while putting on and removing shoes
With this preparation, the area is attractive and functional for getting out the door
(and for when we get home, too). We’ll have less “Where is the other shoe?” and more
“Would you like to wear your black shoes or your blue shoes today?” Instead of a chaotic
departure, it can be an opportunity to work together and create connection.

Learning to do it themselves
Don’t forget that we can also take the time to teach children the skills for getting dressed
when we are not in a hurry to leave the house. Toddlers love to be able to do things
themselves. For example, we can teach them the Montessori coat flip so they can learn
to put on their own coat.

T h e M o n te s s o r i C o a t F l i p
1

2

3

1.	Place the coat on the floor and have the child stand by the hood or label.
2.	They place their hands in the sleeves and lift their arms up over their head.
3.	The coat slides down and onto their body.

141

Scaffolding skills
Younger toddlers may need some help to get dressed. This is an opportunity to scaffold
skills. They will learn how to dress if we break it down into small steps, each one building
on the other, and over time will manage more and more of the process themselves.
Always observe to see how much help they need. Let them first try a step by themselves.
Sit on our hands if we need to—it is so satisfying for them if they manage it successfully.
We might put the T-shirt over their head and see if they can wiggle their arms into the
sleeves.
When they are starting to get frustrated, we can offer some help. Step in to help a little
and then step back to see how they manage. If they are stuck putting on their shoes, we
may try holding the back of their shoe down while they put in their foot, and then see if
they can succeed from there.
If they push us away completely, we can say, “Okay, just let me know if you need any
help. I’m right here.”
As our toddler gets older, they may be able to manage more and more steps independently.
We might be able to get dressed at the same time in the same room. Or eventually we may
find that we are able to leave the room and pop back to check on them now and again.

Slow down. Allow time. Connect.
How long does it take everyone in the house to get dressed when we don’t need to leave
the house? Maybe fifteen minutes? Twenty-five minutes? We can allow the same amount
of time when we need to leave the house to get to school, work, or someplace else.
If we find it difficult to sit and watch a toddler get dressed at toddler pace, we can find
a way to make the process enjoyable, like bringing in a cup of tea or coffee (keep hot
drinks out of their reach) or putting on some relaxing or upbeat music.

When they don’t want to get dressed
Be prepared for times when they won’t want to dress themselves. It can be frustrating
to see our child refuse to put their own shoe on when it seemed just yesterday they were
pleased to have accomplished it on their own. Remember, we don’t want to cook dinner
every day either. Be prepared to help, perhaps offering, “Would you like some help with
your shoe today?”

142

Remember that toddlers are in the process of becoming independent from us—some
days they will want us to help and sometimes they will want to do it themselves. It’s what
I like to call the crisis of independence.
If it is an ongoing problem, we can go back and review the ideas on working with our
child to encourage cooperation in chapter 6. Here are some ideas that would be useful
for getting dressed:
•• waiting until they have finished their activity
•• allowing them time to process our requests
•• offering them choices of clothing
•• using humor
•• keeping our expectations age appropriate
•• using a checklist
Note: If they don’t want to have their diaper changed, it may be because they don’t like
to lie on their backs while it’s happening. It can feel like a very vulnerable position.
Although it is more convenient for us if they lie down, with some practice we can sit
on a low stool to change them while the child stands between our knees. For bowel
movements, we can get the child to lean forward and hold onto the edge of the bathtub
or a low stool while we clean their bottom.

When we need to leave
Even though we can allow children time to go slowly, we don’t have to be saints and
allow unlimited amounts of time. If we run out of time, we can say something like,
“You really want to get dressed by yourself, and it is time to leave. I’m going to help you
put the last things on.” Know our boundaries and set a limit when needed.
Use our gentle hands and sportscast to help acknowledge any resistance they are giving.
“I am putting on your T-shirt. Yes, you are pulling away. Are you trying to tell me you
don’t like it when it goes over your head? Now I’m going to help you with your left
arm . . .”
You can also go stand by the front door. Instead of saying, “I’m leaving without you,” we
could say calmly and clearly, “I’m not leaving without you. I’m putting on my shoes now
and will be by the front door.”

143

E ATI N G
Mealtimes are another moment for connection—for our toddlers to learn that meals are
social occasions, as well as times for nourishing our bodies.
There can be a lot of stress around mealtimes. As parents, we want to make sure our
toddlers eat enough to stay healthy and maybe so they will not wake up hungry at
nighttime. We may have gotten into the habit of letting them walk around with a snack
or feeding them as they play so we know they have eaten. Sometimes it’s the other way
around, and we are worried our toddler is eating too much.
A Montessori approach to eating is quite different. We create a beautiful setting, maybe
with a few flowers on the table. The child can help us prepare the meal and set the table
(with help at first), and as often as possible, we sit down together for a family meal.

The adult’s role
We are laying the foundations for our child’s relationship with food and for good eating
habits. The adult decides where, when, and what the child will eat. Rather than the
parent feeding the toddler, we set things up so the child can successfully feed themselves
and choose how much they want to eat at their own pace. No flying airplanes, bribes
with dessert, or using the television or iPad to distract them.
Setting a rule like sitting at the table for meals helps our children learn the following:
•• meals are social occasions and a time for connection
•• sitting at the table is safer than walking around with food in their mouth
•• we do one thing at a time (eat or play, not both)
•• food stays at the table
As we discussed in chapter 4, we can set up our kitchen so the child can be independent,
as well as be involved in the meal preparation. Children often have more interest in food
when they are involved with preparing the meal, and they can learn to get a drink when
needed if they can reach a water source by themselves.

144

Where—a place to eat
I know that children often eat early in the evening and that our evening schedules can
feel rushed when combining work and children. However, we are the best model for
them to learn manners and to learn that mealtimes are social occasions. So it can be
great to sit down to have meals together with our child. If we do not want to eat a full
meal so early, we could have something small, like a bowl of soup.
Personally I like eating main meals at the family dining/kitchen table. So it is useful to
find a seat that the child can get in and out of independently rather than high chairs with
straps and a tray table in front, which keeps them farther from the table and requires our
assistance.
We can also have a low table where the child sits on a low chair with their feet flat on
the floor. I like to use this at snack time, sitting on a low chair or a floor cushion to join
them. I know some people use this for all meals. It’s up to each family.
I would not expect toddlers to sit at the table until everyone finishes their meal. In our
house, when they were all finished, they would take their plate to the kitchen and go play.
As they got older, they would gradually stay longer at the table to enjoy the conversation.
If they walk away from the table with food or a fork in their hand, we can say: “I’ll keep
the food/fork at the table. It’s okay for you to go.” I say this a lot in my classes when
children are learning to sit at our snack table. If they want to keep eating, they sit back
down with the food. If not, I model clearing things away to show that by leaving, they
are choosing to be all finished.

When—time to eat
Keeping with the daily rhythm discussed earlier, I like to offer meals at regular times
during the day—rather than having the kitchen open at all hours. Three meals a day
(breakfast, lunch, dinner) and a small snack in the morning and/or afternoon. This gives
time for their bodies to digest food and helps them refrain from filling up too much on
snack foods.

What—type of foods to eat
As the adult, we can decide what food we would like our family to eat. If we want to offer
a choice, we could offer the child two options that we find acceptable. They are not yet
capable of making good food choices completely by themselves but will learn about these
choices by the food we offer and the conversations we have.

145

From 12 months, a toddler no longer needs a bottle to drink and can take regular milk in
a glass at mealtimes. Start with a small amount in a small glass, filled only as full as we are
prepared to clean up. Over time, they will master the skill and have no need for a sippy cup
or bottle. We may also be offering breastfeeding, usually at regular moments in the day.
My children were allowed some sugar now and then, applying an “everything in
moderation” approach. They still eat sugar occasionally but are remarkably selfdisciplined. Again this is a personal decision—just be consistent.

How much—the child’s choice
Fortunately, the days of being told to finish everything on our plates are long gone. We
want our children to learn to listen to their bodies to understand when they are full.
Rather than filling up a toddler’s plate (which can feel overwhelming or end up on the
floor), we can start with a small amount of food and let them serve themselves more if
they would like.
Leave the child in charge. Trust that they are taking enough. Children at this age
generally will not starve themselves. They will take as much as they need if we remove
our control around food and trust them to listen to their bodies.
If our child is not a big eater, we will often observe that their appetite fluctuates.
Sometimes they don’t seem to finish anything on their plate, yet during growth spurts,
they may eat three meals a day, plus snacks, and still be hungry. Their bodies know
exactly what they need.
A young toddler can also learn to use cutlery to feed themselves. A fork is easier to use
than a spoon at the beginning. We can show them how to pierce a piece of food with the
fork, and leave it in front of them so they can bring it to their own mouth. Then they will
take over more and more steps themselves. For learning to use a spoon, we can provide
thicker offerings like oatmeal until they gain more mastery.

Food battles
If we find ourselves needing to hand-feed our child, bribe them, or distract them with
books or TV to get them to eat, then they are making mealtimes our problem. It’s time
to reestablish good eating habits.
We can explain simply to our child that we have changed our mind about mealtimes. We
can tell them that we want to enjoy our food together and it is important that they learn
to listen to their own body to decide how much they will eat for themselves.

146

Start at breakfast time. Offer a nutritious breakfast, and then sit down with them and eat
breakfast, too, talking about anything (except food!). If they do not eat anything, simply
ask if they are finished (no lecturing) and help them bring their plate to the kitchen. We
could say, “You listened to your body, and it said it was all done.”
If they come back asking for food, we can be understanding but clear that the meal is all
finished and there will be more food at the next meal.
Repeat at lunchtime and dinner. It’s a good idea to avoid snacks for a few days so they
don’t fill up on them while we are trying to improve mealtimes. If they have not eaten
very much, likely by the end of the day they will be hungry and eat some food at dinner.
Include some of their favorite foods, but don’t make different food if they demand it.
They are also learning to eat what the family is eating.
Continue this for one week and keep a diary of what the child eats. Write it down, stick
the list on the fridge, and be unattached to the outcome. Don’t make a big deal about
food or mention it much at all. Have confidence. It may take only a few days before the
food battles have been replaced by a child who sits at the table and feeds themselves.
Note: Make sure the child doesn’t have any medical reasons for refusing to eat or have
other food-related issues. If there is no improvement in eating after a week or if you
have any concerns, consult a doctor. There may also be a change in the child’s bowel
movements as their digestion adjusts.

Throwing food
Toddlers like to explore the world around them. Throwing food off their plate can be
an experiment to see what happens when it falls. Usually they start throwing their food
when they have had enough to eat: They are telling us they are all finished. We can ask
them, “Are you telling me you are all finished?” We can show them a sign with both our
hands out, palms up. “You can say ‘all finished’ like this. All finished. Now let’s take our
plates to the kitchen. Let me know if you need some help.”
If they are not finished eating but continue to throw their food, we can be kind and
clear and tell them that we will help them take the plate to the kitchen. Again not with
a threatening tone, simply setting a clear limit. Generally food throwing is a phase.
Remain calm and (yes) consistent. It will pass.
Similarly if they were spilling their water on purpose, I would take their glass away.
“I’m going to put the glass over here. Let me know when you would like to use the glass
for drinking.” If they asked for it but then poured it on the table again, I would calmly
remove it for the rest of the meal.

147

S LE E P I N G
We can apply Montessori principles when it comes to sleeping—whether we choose to
have our child in their own room, in their own bed in our room, or co-sleeping in a
family bed. In our Montessori training, they recommended having the child in their
own room, but sleeping is a very personal choice, so find an arrangement that works best
for the family.
Around 12 to 16 months, a toddler will generally move to one nap time in the middle of
the day and then sleep at night from ten to twelve hours. If our child is getting more or
less than this, we will know if our child is getting enough sleep if they generally wake
happy and are pretty happy during the day.

Where to sleep
A toddler’s sleeping place should be truly restful. Make the sleeping area safe and free
from too many distractions and visual clutter. Look for a way for the child to be able
to get into and out of bed independently. By around 14 months, they could move into a
toddler bed with a low side that they are able to climb into independently, or use a floor
mattress.
We may wish to use a night-light. In Sarah Ockwell-Smith’s article “One Simple Way to
Improve Your Baby or Child’s Sleep Today!” she advises avoiding white- and blue-based
lights and looking for red-based light, which does not affect melatonin production.
We can have a drink at the ready if children are thirsty in the night.
We also may choose a family bed or allow our children to come in during the night. It is
up to each family.
Just be clear on what is okay. If we are complaining about a toddler’s sleep, it’s likely
that a part of the sleeping arrangement is not working for us, and we may need to make
a change.

148

Getting to sleep
I have shared a lot about the importance of giving the child just as much help as they
need. We support them, step in to help, and step back again. The same goes for sleep.
Establish a clear, regular bedtime sequence. Allow around an hour to have a bath, brush
teeth, read some books, and talk about all the things that happened that day. Then give
only as much help as they need to fall asleep.
Some children have a good relationship with sleep from birth and will simply put
themselves to bed when they are tired (often on a floor mattress, from birth)—the holy
grail. These children often have clear sleep associations from birth, and consistent
bedtime sequences. They go to bed drowsy but awake, do not have sleep crutches, and
feed separately from falling asleep.
Some toddlers may be happy to read books and fall asleep by themselves, whereas others
may need to cry at bedtime. If we know they have eaten well, have a dry diaper, and
have had a good play, then their crying is saying they are ready to sleep. But I would not
recommend leaving them to cry it out alone.
A nice, gentle technique to help them fall asleep by themselves is to place a chair by
their bed. Once the bedtime sequence is finished, sit in the chair quietly (maybe read a
book). If they are crying, rub their back occasionally and say something soothing, rather
than picking them up. We can lay them back down if they stand up and not engage in
conversation or too much eye contact.
Once they have learned to fall asleep like this, we can move our chair farther away from
the bed and repeat for a few nights. Every few nights the chair moves closer to the door,
and after about two weeks, we can sit in the chair outside the door where they can still
see us. After a couple of nights, the child usually no longer needs us to sit with them.
If they are sick or teething, they may need some additional support from us. These
things can disrupt their sleeping pattern, and we will need to reestablish it once they
are feeling better.

Sleep crutches and night waking
We all drift in and out of light sleep during the night, move around a little, and then
resettle. Generally we resettle so quickly, we don’t remember waking. If the conditions
change, however—for example, if our pillow has fallen off the bed—we will wake up,
look around until we find it, and then need to get back to sleep.

149

The same is true with babies and toddlers. If they fall asleep while being rocked or fed,
they will wake up from light sleep during their nap or night sleep and look for the adult,
unable to resettle until the same conditions are established. We become their sleep crutch.
I got into a crazy cycle with my firstborn. I rocked him to sleep for months, he often
fed to sleep, and he’d wake often at night looking for the breast. I’d feed him again, his
tummy would hurt (in hindsight, I realize that he probably hadn’t had time to digest his
food), and he’d wake again.
I learned my lesson. With my second child, we kept a clear daily rhythm from birth. Eat,
play, sleep. It was much clearer for us (and her) when it was time to rest. She lay in bed
drowsy but awake before falling asleep, loved sleeping in her bed, and needed very little
help at all to sleep (though she wouldn’t sleep while out and about—probably too much
to see).
Learn from my mistakes and remove sleep crutches.
If the child is waking to be fed at night and we want to remove the sleep crutch of
feeding to sleep, we can look for ways to feed less during the night. Watering down the
milk gradually in a bottle is an option. I know one breastfeeding mother who fell asleep
by accident on the couch one night. Asleep in the other room, their child didn’t wake up.
So she slept on the couch in the living room for a week and their child stopped waking
to feed.
If they are waking at night to request a cuddle or a drink, to have their cover adjusted, or
to find their favorite soft toys, I would discuss those things during the day, at a neutral
time. “You know how you woke up last night and couldn’t get back to sleep without your
covers over you? Let’s think of a way that you can take care of it yourself in the night.
Do you have any ideas? Perhaps we can put the cover across the bed and tuck it in extra
tight, or practice pulling up the covers.”
If a child is continuing to have sleep difficulties that affect the well-being of the child or
the family, please see a sleep specialist.

150

B R U S H I N G TE ETH
There are no official Montessori guidelines for brushing teeth, but it is a commonly
asked question when children do not like brushing their teeth.
We come back to having a respectful relationship with the toddler. We are working with
our children, where they are today. We let them lead. They choose whether to brush
their teeth before, during, or after their bath. They come with us to the store to select the
toothbrush they want. But we are clear that teeth brushing is not optional.
Again, we set things up for the child to be independent so they can help themselves. For
a toddler, that might mean helping them at the end to “finish off” and make sure their
teeth are clean. When we assist, we do so gently and respectfully. It must feel pretty
strange for someone to poke a toothbrush in our mouth if we are a toddler.
We could brush our teeth alongside our child to help give them a concrete understanding
of caring for our teeth. We can sing, “This is the way we brush our teeth, brush our teeth,
brush our teeth. This is the way we brush our teeth every night and morning.” Not to
distract them, just to make it a light moment in our day.
If our child detects that we are trying to distract them, they may feel like we are tricking
them rather than getting their cooperation and may resist even more. Just as stickers
work for a while as a reward, distraction works only up to a point before they tire of that
“trick” and you need to work even harder to keep them on task.
If we have tried working with them and they are still avoiding brushing their teeth, we
can say calmly with confidence and handling them very gently, “Now I’m going to help
you brush your teeth. We are going back to the bathroom. I’m opening your mouth . . .”
We are being kind and clear.

151

PA R T T WO

D E A LI N G W ITH C H A N G E S

TO I LETI N G
The period when a toddler learns how to use the toilet does not have to be dreaded. After
all, it is a completely natural part of being a human. Our children pick up our attitudes
toward dirty diapers from infancy, and if we are screwing up our face, they will learn
that it is a dirty thing instead of a normal bodily process.
I love this analogy from a fellow Montessori teacher. When a baby pulls themselves up
to standing, falls down, stands up again, and then falls down, over and over until they
master it, we think it is cute. When our child is learning to use the bathroom and they
pee on the floor or poop in their pants, they are also practicing until they master it—
except there is pee and poop.
So with open minds, I would love to help make this process a little less stressful.

Scaffolding skills
The child will slowly build skills around using the toilet, starting with being able to
manage their own clothing. At first they practice pulling their shorts or trousers up and
down, and then later their underwear.

152

We can offer a potty/toilet when we change their diaper, never forcing them, but making
it part of the daily rhythm. “Would you like to sit on the potty/toilet?” “Now that you’re
finished on the potty, I’m going to put your diaper back on.”
Using cloth diapers can also help the child feel wet when they have peed, increasing their
body awareness.

Signs of readiness—Let the child lead
The most important thing is to follow our child. It is not a competition.
I’m not including any ages here, but rather, signs that the child may be ready:
•• pulling at their diaper when it is wet or soiled
•• squatting or going to a private place while they poop
•• telling us they have peed or pooped
•• resisting having their diaper changed (sometimes)
•• taking off their diaper

Set up the bathroom with our child
Have a potty or a small toilet seat on the toilet. If they are using the toilet, we will need
a step that the child can manage themselves and as a place to rest their feet to feel secure
while sitting on the toilet.
We can also have a place in the bathroom for soiled clothes and a pile of clean
underwear. A pile of cleaning rags for puddles is useful, too.
Having everything at the ready and being prepared will help us remain relaxed and not
rushing about, looking for things. If they don’t make it to the potty/toilet, we can calmly
say, “Ah. I see you are wet. We have everything we need right here. Let’s get dry.”

Keep it normal
Involve the child in the process. Buy some underwear together, as well as a potty. We can
also find training pants that hold a little bit of pee to help when they are trying to get to
the toilet in time.

153

As we are scaffolding skills, we can start by letting them wear just their underpants
when we are at home so there is less to have to take on and off, and less to wash. They are
learning what it feels like to be wet and may even stand to watch the pee run down their
leg. That’s the first step. Increasing body awareness.
Next we can help them go to the bathroom to change. Montessori teachers generally say,
“You have wet clothes. Let’s go change,” rather than, “You had an accident.”
Offer the potty/toilet regularly at first. If we ask a toddler if they need to go to the
toilet, they usually answer “no.” It’s a common response for a toddler who is developing
autonomy. Instead, we can wait until they aren’t in the middle of an activity and simply
say, “It’s time to go to the potty,” leading them to the bathroom.
After some weeks, they generally will begin to have more awareness of their body and
sometimes tell us that they need to go to the toilet. We will also observe that they are
able to hold it in for longer periods at a time. Eventually they won’t need reminders at all.

Dry at night
We can move to underpants at nap time and night at the same time or when we notice
they can hold for longer periods and wake with a dry diaper/underwear.
Place a thick towel across the child’s sheets and tuck it in, or use a bed protector; either
can easily be removed during the night if needed.

Holding it in
Sometimes a child becomes scared of pooping. It may have hurt once to poop, someone
may have had a reaction that made them scared to poop on the toilet, or we may not
know why. Check with a doctor if you believe there is a medical issue.
If all appears healthy, help the child relax by being calm and supportive. We can tell
them, “The poop will come out when it is ready. It may take a week, it may take two
weeks, but it knows when to come. Our bodies are very clever.” Then try not to talk
about it too much. Rub their tummy if their abdomen hurts.
If they usually go somewhere private to poop, gradually invite the child to move to the
bathroom to poop in private. Then we can start to invite them to sit on the potty with
their diaper on. Gradually they will feel safe on the potty/toilet without the diaper/
underwear on. Again, we are simply supporting them and scaffolding skills.

154

If they refuse to use the toilet
We don’t force a child to use the toilet. This is their body. We can’t rush it or do this for
them. We can only support them and find ways to work with them.
We can make sure we aren’t interrupting them to take them to the bathroom. We can
keep offering the potty/toilet and trust that they will learn to use them. We accept them
for who they are and where they are in this process.

Peeing on the floor intentionally
Sometimes a toddler who knows how to use the toilet will suddenly start to pee on the
floor intentionally. Observe them. Often they are telling us through their behavior that
they are unhappy about something in their world, for example, a sibling who has started
crawling and taking more of their space.
They want us to see them, and we can look from a place of curiosity, in order to
understand them. We can acknowledge their feelings but set a clear limit about the
behavior. “You’re upset about something? I can’t let you pee on the floor. But I want to
work it out with you.” We can go back to creating connection, finding ways to work with
them, and do some problem solving together with them. (See chapters 5 and 6.)

SAYI N G G O O D BY E TO PAC I F I E R S
When applying the Montessori approach, pacifiers aren’t used much or are phased out
within the first year. If a young toddler still uses a pacifier, phasing them out does not
have to be a difficult process.
Even though the child is young, we can let them know that we are going to make a change.
The first step is to start using the pacifier only for sleeping. When our child wakes, we
can put it in a box by the bed out of reach, so our child (or even the adult) will not be
tempted to use it.
If our child asks for the pacifier at other times, we can try to observe why they feel the
need to suck and address the root cause. Maybe they need something engaging to do
with their hands or a toy to play with, maybe they are seeking connection and we can
offer a cuddle, or maybe they need help to calm down or to relax their nervous system.

155

Here are some ideas that may help:
•• sucking yogurt through a straw
•• blowing bubbles
•• holding tightly on to a book or soft toy
•• using a bottle with a straw
•• blowing water through a straw to make bubbles
•• a brisk towel rub after a bath
•• deep-pressure bear hugs
•• kneading dough
•• squeezing bath toys
•• a slow, firm back rub
We can then make a plan with our toddler to get rid of the pacifier at bedtime, too. One
popular choice is to give it to a friend with a new baby.
It generally takes a few days for the child to learn to fall asleep without it, during which
they may need a little—just enough—extra support. Be careful not to add any new
sleeping crutches into the routine. (For children who find this difficult in the middle of
the night, see the section on sleeping, beginning on page 147.)

S I B LI N G S
Often parents tell me that these ideas would be simple to carry out if they had only one
child. Having more than one child makes it difficult for parents to find time to observe
each child, meet their individual needs, and deal with arguments among siblings. Not to
mention that having a new baby in the home, or an older sibling bossing them around,
can be disruptive to a toddler.

The new baby
In their book Siblings Without Rivalry, Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish open with a story
that illustrates the effect a new sibling can have on a child’s life.
Imagine that our partner comes home one day and says that they love us so much, they
are going to get another partner, in addition to us. The new partner is going to sleep

156

in our old bed and use our clothes, and we are going to share everything with them. I
think many of us would be furious and feel very jealous. So it’s not surprising that a new
addition to the family can have a huge effect on some children.
We can do a lot to prepare our toddler before the baby arrives. We can talk to our child
about what life with a new baby might look like. Especially helpful are books with
realistic pictures showing parents looking after the baby while still spending time with
the other children in the home. We can let them talk and sing to the baby in the belly
and begin to build a connection. We can let them help prepare the baby’s space. And we
can make a point of enjoying our last days together in our current family configuration.
(The memory of going to the park with my son the day before my daughter was born is
one I’ll always cherish.)
When it’s time to introduce our toddler to the new baby (if our toddler has not been
present at the birth), we can put down the baby before they enter the room so our
attention is solely on them. This can be easier for the toddler than walking in to see us
holding the new baby in our arms.
Try to keep the early weeks at home simple and, if possible, have extra hands to help.
We can ask others to help with the newborn for some of the time, so we can have time
to be alone with our toddler.
Some toddlers like to be involved in caring for the new baby—fetching a clean diaper or
getting soap for the baby’s bath. Some won’t be interested, and that’s okay, too.
We can keep a basket of books and some favorite toys on hand while we feed, so we can
feed the baby and connect with our toddler at the same time.
When the toddler is playing and the baby is awake, it can be fun to talk to the baby
about what the toddler is doing. The baby will benefit from our conversation, and the
toddler will like being the topic of discussion.
(For ideas on how to set up the home with more than one child, see page 75.)

When the toddler gets upset about the new baby
Our toddler may say they hate the new baby. They may be emotional or difficult or
intentionally destructive at this disruptive time in their life.
This behavior is simply their way of telling us they are having a hard time. Instead of
saying, “You don’t really hate the baby,” and denying their feelings, remember that they

157

need us to see things from their perspective, to be understanding and to offer them
connection.
We can allow all the angry feelings. We can ask, “Is it annoying you that they are
touching the one thing you are playing with?” and listen to them. Really allow them to
let it out.
But we don’t have to allow all behavior. For example, if they are hitting the baby, here are
some things we can do:
•• Step in immediately and remove their hands gently. “I can’t let you hit the baby. We
are gentle with the baby.”
•• We can translate for the baby. “The baby is crying. They are saying that’s too much.”
•• We can show them a safer way to interact. “Let’s show the baby this soft toy instead.”

Make special time with each child
We can find creative ways to spend regular one-on-one time with our toddler: a trip to
the supermarket, a walk down the road to a cafe for a snack, or a visit to the playground
for ten minutes on the swing.
Then, when they want something from us and we’re not available, we can write it down
in a notebook and talk about it during our special time together.

Stay neutral
Siblings like to draw us into their disputes to take sides. My favorite advice (which I need
to remind myself of at times) is to stay neutral and not take sides in these conflicts.
Our role is to support both children, keep them safe if needed, and help mediate so that
both parties take responsibility. We see things from both perspectives and give them just
as much help as they need.
Yes, even with a toddler. There was a time when my children were young (2 years old and
9 months old) and both wanted the same toy truck. It’s tempting to solve the problem for
them—find another toy, distract one of them, try to get them to share. However, I simply
said, “One truck and two children. Now, that’s a problem.” Then my son took off the
back part of the truck and gave it to his sister, keeping the front wheels for himself. He
thought of something far more creative than I would have come up with.

158

Parent as if we have a big family
In his book Thriving! parenting educator Michael Grose suggests that we raise siblings as
if we have a large family with four or more children. Parents of large families can’t solve
every argument and entertain every child. Parents are the leaders of the family. They lay
the foundations of the family’s values and oversee the running of the ship.

When to step in
Generally when children fight, we rush in and ask, “Who did it?” The children
immediately try to defend themselves or blame their sibling: “They started it!”
Here are alternative ways to step in if siblings are fighting.
1. Be visible

During minor arguments, we can let them see that we are in the room and then leave
again. Think of this as an important experience in conflict resolution. They know that
we have seen them arguing, but we are confident they can work it out themselves.
2. Observe

When arguing heats up, we can stay and observe. They will feel our presence without
our having to say anything.
3. Remind them of the house/ground rules

We may need to remind them of a rule. For example, if it sounds like rough play is going
too far, we can check in with them. We can say, “Rough play by mutual consent” or
“Do you need to say stop? You don’t sound like you are having fun anymore.”
4. Provide some support

When they can’t work it out themselves, we can give them support to help them solve the
conflict:
•• Listen to both sides (without judgment).
•• Acknowledge how both parties feel, and show that we understand and can see things
from both of their perspectives.
•• Describe the problem.
•• Express interest in hearing how they work it out.
•• Move away to let them find a solution.

159

An example:
“You two sound mad at each other.” (Acknowledge their feelings.)
“So Sara, you want to keep holding the puppy. And you, Billy, want to have a turn too.”
(Reflect each child’s point of view.)
“That’s a tough one: two children and one puppy.” (Describe the problem.)
“I have confidence that you two can work out a solution that’s fair to each of you . . . and
fair to the puppy.” (Move away.)
5. Separate children so they can calm down

When we start to feel uncomfortable with the level of fighting, we can step in to separate
them. “I see two angry children. I can’t let you hurt each other. You go over here, and
you go over there until everyone is calm.”
Even with preverbal children, it’s the same process.
6. Problem solve

Once the fighting has calmed down, we can do some problem solving together. As we
discussed in chapter 6:
•• Everyone brainstorms ideas of how to solve the problem (with younger toddlers,
we might come up with most of the ideas).
•• We decide upon a solution that everyone can live with.
•• We follow up to see if the solution is working or needs to be adjusted.

Foster gratitude for, and positive interactions with, siblings
Generally, the more we foster positive interactions between our children, the closer they
become. We can create situations for them to enjoy each other’s company, regardless of
whether there is a large age gap.
At neutral times, we can discuss the positive side of having siblings or ask our children
what they like about having a sibling.
Even if they aren’t close friends, we can expect them to treat each other with respect.

160

Treating each child individually
Just as counting out an equal number of peas at every meal is nearly impossible, so
is trying to parent our children equally. Instead, we can strive to parent our children
individually, based on their needs.
There will be times when one child needs more one-on-one time from us, perhaps
around their birthday or when passing through a developmental change. Each sibling
learns that we will be available when they need our help.
If the children demand our attention at the same time, we can say, “As soon as I have
finished here, I will come help you.” And if two children want to speak at the same time,
we can let them know that we are available to listen to both of them, although not at
the same time. “First I’ll finish listening to you [Child A], and then I really want to hear
what you [Child B] have to say.”
We can also avoid comparing siblings. It is easy to make offhand comments like
“Look at your brother eating his dinner.”
Children themselves may try to compete with their siblings. Again, we can bring the
focus back to the individual, rather than making it about their sibling. For example,
if one child says that their sibling has more cheese, we can say, “Did you want more
cheese?” thereby treating each child individually.

Labels
For more on avoiding labels and accepting each sibling for who they are, see chapter 5.

161

PA R T T H R E E

U S E F U L S K I LL S FO R
O U R TO D D LE R S TO LE A R N

SHARING
When our child was a baby, they may have easily handed things to us or, when
something was taken out of their hand, they may have simply turned around to find
something else to play with.
This willingness to share changes when they become a toddler, as they develop a
heightened sense of “I,” and want to practice something until mastery. Suddenly, around
14 to 16 months, we may see them pull their activity close to them, push away another
child who is watching them at work, or shout “No!” to an innocent toddler walking by.
Before 2.5 years, toddlers are mostly interested in parallel play—playing on their own
alongside another child—rather than sharing their toys and playing together. So we may
need to adjust our expectations that a toddler will be able to share their toys. (If they
have older siblings or play regularly with others in day care, they may learn to share a
little earlier.)

Share by taking turns
Instead of asking the child to share their activity with someone else, in Montessori
schools the ground rule is that we share by taking turns. We have only one of each
activity; a child can work as long as they like with it (to allow repetition, concentration,
and mastery); and children learn to wait their turn, a useful skill.
We can have the same rule in our home and provide support if needed:
•• Observe to see if they are happy to allow another child to watch or join in the activity.
We can see a lot from their body language, and give only as much help as they need.
Allow them to resolve low-level disputes as much as possible by themselves.
•• Help them use words if someone wants their toy. “My turn. It will be available soon.”
They can put their hands on their hips for emphasis.

162

•• Help the child who is having trouble waiting. “Do you want a turn right now? It will
be available soon.”
•• If a child is being physical, we can step in to be a bodyguard, maybe by using a gentle
hand or placing our body between the children. “I can’t let you push them. Are you
telling them that you were playing with that?”
Around 2.5 years, they may become interested in playing with another child for a while.
They may need some guidance, for example, to help them with some words or to learn
from situations that come up. “It looks like Peter wants to play by himself now. Let’s
come back later and you can have a turn then.”

At the playground or in public places
It can be difficult in public places where different families have different rules.
If someone is waiting for our child to finish on the swing, we can say to the other child,
“It looks like you’d like a turn. You can have a turn when our child is all finished. The
swing will be available very soon.” Then they (and their parent) know that we see they
would like a turn and they will be next.
To our child, we could say, “I see another child is waiting to use the swing. Let’s count
to ten and then we’ll give them a turn.” Rather than staying with the activity until our
child is completely finished, we are modeling grace and courtesy toward others.

Sharing with visitors
When visitors are coming over, we can ask our children if there are any toys they would
like to put away in a cupboard. Then we can check that they are happy for the visitors
to play with everything else. We are helping them prepare themselves and have a say in
what their friends can play with.

LE A R N I N G H OW TO I NTE R R U P T A N A D U LT
Although Montessori is a child-led approach to education, a young child can learn to
wait and interrupt conversations in a respectful way.

163

My children’s first Montessori teacher told the children that if she was in the middle of
giving a lesson to another child and they had something they needed to tell her, they
should put their hand on her shoulder. This would tell her that they had something
important to say. Then, as soon as there was an appropriate place to pause in the lesson,
she would stop and see what the child needed.
This principle can be used in the home, too. If we are on a phone call or talking to
someone and our toddler has something to say, we can tap our shoulder to remind them
to put their hand there. They place their hand there, and as soon as we can, we ask them
what they wanted to say.
It takes practice, but it really works. A hand on our shoulder, with our hand on theirs,
gives them the message, “What you have to tell me is important. I’ll be right with you.”

S K I LL S FO R I NTROV E RTE D TO D D LE R S
Parents of more introverted children may be worried that their child is not as confident
or outgoing as other children. Or they may recognize that their child is an introvert,
but worry that they don’t have the skills to manage in a world that expects a child to
maneuver confidently through social situations.
In her book Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can’t Stop Talking, Susan
Cain argues that introverts are undervalued for their empathy and their ability to listen.
As parents of introverts, we can help support them without trying to change them.
First of all accept them for who they are. Jump back to chapter 5 for a refresher on these
principles. Avoid using labels like shy. These can become crutches, excusing a child from
awkward situations (“They’re just shy”). Instead, we can help them learn how to manage
these situations (“Do you want some more time to warm up/join in?”). And try not to
compare them to siblings or other children by saying things like, “Look how well they
play with the others.”
Then, from this place of acceptance, we can see things from their perspective and offer
understanding. Acknowledge their feelings. We can listen to them or hold them if
needed. “Are you feeling worried about going to Grandma’s house/the birthday party/the
supermarket?” Allow them to feel safe.
It can help to prepare them in advance for situations that might make them nervous by
giving them an idea of what to expect.

164

If our child takes some time to warm up in social situations, allow them to stand by us
and observe the scene until they are ready to join in. We don’t need to give them any
special attention or make it a big deal. We can carry on our adult conversation; the child
will drift off once they are ready.
Over time, we can help our child build skills that will empower them, so that they don’t
feel like they cannot handle certain situations.
Such skill building could include:
•• Role playing. For example, they can practice saying “hello” to the adult at the door
and “happy birthday” to the child having the party.
•• Showing them how to excuse themselves to have a break, if they are finding a social
situation overwhelming. For example, “I’m just going to have some quiet time.”
•• Practicing in less confrontational situations, such as handing over the money in
a shop or ordering a drink in a cafe. We will be there to support them if needed.
“Would you be able to say that a little louder? It looks like the waiter can’t hear you.”
•• Practicing easy phrases they can use to be assertive. For example, “Stop. I don’t like
that.”
•• Showing them how to use their body language, such as putting their hands on their
hips if someone has done something they don’t like.
Finally, we can help them gain confidence by celebrating the skills they do have and by
learning how to care for themselves, others, and the environment.
On the other hand, if our child is very confident and loves to run up to other children
and hug them, we can translate for the child who does not seem to be enjoying their
attention. “It looks like they are pulling away. Maybe we should check to see if they feel
like being hugged.” Our child may take it personally that the other child isn’t as excited
as they are; we can model how to accept other children the way they are.
As adults, it is also useful to remember to check in with any child before we handle
them, particularly if they are not our child. We can check with them before we give them
a hug (“Would you like a hug?” rather than “Give me a hug!”), tell a young toddler we are
going to pick them up and get their consent before handling them, and ask if they’d like
help before we do something for them. We respect that the child has a say about if, when,
and how they will be handled.

165

A H IT TI N G/B ITI N G/P U S H I N G/
TH ROW I N G P H A S E
Toddlers are learning how to communicate. Sometimes they use words or sounds.
Sometimes they use body language. And sometimes they hit, bite, or push us or other
children. It is another way of communicating. It isn’t desirable, but it is a phase we can
support and help them through.
First, let me say that if our child is hitting, biting, or pushing other children, we should
be prepared to shadow our child in social situations and be ready to step in to keep other
children safe. We don’t have to be anxious—our child will pick up on it—but we can stay
close or sit on the ground next to them to support them. We can step in gently or place a
hand between the children if needed. We can acknowledge their feelings while stopping
the behavior and separating the children.
We may also want to limit outings that are likely to make our child uncomfortable and
trigger this behavior (lots of children, a noisy environment, etc.), at least for a time.

Observing the behavior
A Montessori teacher’s answer to almost everything is to first observe. We are looking to see
what kind of situations seem to cause the behavior. Here are some questions we can ask:
•• Time. What time does the behavior happen? Is our child hungry or tired?
•• Changes. Are they teething? Are there any changes at home, such as a new baby or
a new house?
•• Activity. What are they doing/playing with at the time of being triggered?
•• Other children. How many children are around? Are the children the same age,
younger, or older?
•• Emotion being expressed. Just before it happens, how do they look? Playful?
Frustrated? Confused?
•• Environment. Look at the environment where it happens. Is it busy? Is it very
colorful or otherwise too stimulating? Is there a lot of clutter? Is there a lot of
children’s artwork around the room, which is possibly too much sensory input?
Or is it peaceful and serene?
•• Adults. How do we respond? Do we bring additional anxiety to the situation?

166

Preventing the behavior
By observing, we may see patterns to their behavior and identify ways we can support
our child. Here are some examples:
•• Hungry. Just before mealtime, give them something hard to snack on before they get
too hungry (good for relaxing their nervous system).
•• Teething. Offer a variety of (cold) teething toys.
•• Needing to explore. Allow them to explore toys with their mouth.
•• Overstimulating environment. Reduce the amount of stimulation to make it calmer.
•• Too much noise. Remove them when we notice that things are becoming too loud.
•• Transitions. Is the structure of the day predictable enough? Are transitions difficult
for them? Allow enough time for them to finish what they are doing. Make sure they
get enough free, unstructured play.
•• Protective of their activity. Model words they can use. They can put their hands on
their hips and say, “I’m using this now. It will be available soon.”
•• Sensitive to their personal space. Help them avoid situations where they are
cornered or do not have enough personal space.
•• Misguided playfulness. Some children may bite to be playful or show love, perhaps
misunderstanding games such as blowing raspberries on their tummies. Show them
other ways to be affectionate, such as cuddles or mutual rough play.
•• Learning social interaction. If they push another child, they may be wanting to say,
“Can we play?” Give them words.
•• Problem with their hearing and eyesight. A problem with either can feel
disorienting for a child, and they may react by being aggressive.
•• Need to relax their nervous system. Refer to page 155 for ideas on relaxing their
nervous system, such as big bear hugs.
Children are very sensitive to our emotions, so we can try to stay confident and not show
signs of worry when we are around other children. Our child may sense our anxiety,
which will add to their discomfort.
See them every day with fresh eyes and a blank slate. This too will pass.

What to do if they hit/bite/push?
We can be clear that we allow all feelings—toddlers have a lot they need to express—but
they cannot hit, bite, or push others. Acknowledge their feelings and remove them from
the situation. Once they are calm, we can help them make amends, check that the other
child is okay, offer them a tissue if they are crying, or model apologizing.

167

Here are a couple of examples:
“You look angry. I can’t let you bite me. I’m putting you down.” We can make sure they
are safe while they calm down. Then we can get them to help check that we are okay.
“Shall we see if I am hurt? Let’s see. Yes, it’s a bit red here.” If we have allowed enough
time for them to become completely calm, they will often want to rub it or give us a kiss.
“You didn’t like them touching your hair? I cannot let you hit them. Let’s go over here
where it is quiet to calm down.” Then, once they have had time to calm down, we can help
them see if the other child is okay. Or model apologizing. “I’m so sorry that my child hit
you. I think he was frustrated, but it’s not okay for him to hit you. Are you okay?”
We can help our child explain the problem—for example, that they were playing with the
toy the other child took.
Hitting, biting, and pushing phases may require a lot of patience and repetition. We need
to remember not to take their behavior personally and be their calm guide during this
difficult phase.

What if they laugh after hitting, biting, or pushing?
Children are generally testing a limit by laughing after they hit, bite, or push. They are
looking for clear leadership, clarity about what is okay and what is not. We can continue to
step in to stop the behavior—calmly and clearly—rather than telling them to stop laughing.
However, if the laughing causes a reaction in us, we can tell them how it makes us feel and
find a place to calm down if needed. “It upsets me when you hit me. It’s important for me to
feel safe. I’m going to make a cup of tea to calm down. I’ll be back when I’m feeling better.”

And throwing?
Again, this is usually a phase. They want to touch and explore everything around them.
•• Look to see if there are any patterns to the behavior.
•• Take preventive measures by moving things that they are pushing off tables, placing
them on the ground or out of reach. We may need to remove wooden toys that will
hurt if thrown for this period.
•• Provide opportunities to do lots of throwing at the park or with soft items in the house
(socks are excellent for this).
•• Be kind, clear, and consistent about what they can throw. “I can’t let you throw that
inside, but you can throw these little bean bags.”

168

B U I LD I N G CO N C E NTR ATI O N
“The essential thing is for the task to arouse such interest that it engages
the child’s whole personality.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, The Absorbent Mind

Concentration is not just a matter of being busy. It means engaging all the senses. To help a
toddler build their concentration, we start by observing them to see what they are interested
in and learning to master. Then we give them time, possibility, and a prepared environment,
and let them repeat the activity and allow them to deepen their concentration.

Tips for building concentration
1. Try to avoid interrupting

Sometimes we comment too much on what the child is doing. We name the puzzle
pieces, the colors, and so on. Trust the child. Remain silent when they are working on
something. Respond if they look to us.
There are many other moments when we can talk and offer rich language possibilities: when
we are out exploring the world together, while preparing and eating meals, and during
moments of care, such as bathing. Not when they are in a moment of concentration.
2. Watch what they repeat

Are they opening and closing drawers? Taking objects in and out of baskets? Sorting
clothing? Picking up small objects? Collecting rocks? Cleaning the floor? Preparing
food? This repetition shows us what they are interested in.
Allow this repetition. Ask them if they would like to repeat it when they have finished.
Provide similar opportunities with increasing difficulty.
3. Less is more

Have only a few activities available. Anything that is too easy or too difficult can be put
into a storage box and rotated onto the shelves at another time. We will see that children
can focus more easily when there is less available. And we can see clearly which activities
are no longer being used or which are being thrown—a good sign that we can put them
away and bring out another choice.

169

4. Help as much as is needed and as little as necessary

If we observe that our child is having difficulty, we can wait to see if they can manage
themselves. When they are about to give up, we can step in to just give a little bit of help,
then step back to see how they get on. This may help them get further with the activity
and allow them to continue concentrating. For example, we may be able to help them
with turning a key, then step back to see if they can open the box.
5. Have a work area

A floor mat or small table can help a child focus on the activity they have chosen. When
they select an activity, there is a small moment when we could help them take it to the
mat or table.
However, if they are already working at the shelf, I would not interrupt their
concentration. Our interference may be enough to break their concentration completely,
and they might walk away from the activity.

D E A LI N G W ITH F R U STR ATI O N
It is common to want to jump in to help our child if they are frustrated. Dr. Montessori
used to have some rosary beads she would patiently count to hold herself back from
stepping in too quickly.
The child’s struggle is important. The child will enjoy mastering activities that are hard
enough to provide a challenge, but not so difficult that they’ll give up easily. We can wait
until they are about to give up and, as before, step in to give a small amount of assistance
before stepping back again.
Types of help we can give our child:
•• Showing them. “Would you like me to show you?” “Would you like a little help?”
Then we could show them slowly (without words) how to, for example, turn a puzzle
piece around until it fits.
•• Giving a verbal cue. “Have you tried turning it?”
Sometimes they will refuse all help, and their frustration will turn into anger. It’s okay
for the child to express that, too. They will try again another time.
When we support them in these ways, we recognize that frustration is a part of learning.

170

W H E N O U R C H I LD I S C LI N GY
Some children don’t want to play by themselves. They won’t let us leave the room, even to
use the toilet. And the more space we want, the more clingy they get. There can be many
reasons why they are clingy:
•• The child’s temperament. Some children prefer the safety of their parent’s company.
•• A trip, a change in routine, sickness, a change in work situation, new child care. These
big changes can make the child feel cautious.
•• Our attention is elsewhere. For example, we’re cooking dinner or writing an email.
•• They can’t manage independently because they lack the skills or access to what they
need, or they’re reliant on an adult to do things for them.
It is normal for toddlers to need supervision, and they won’t be able to play by
themselves for hours. It’s also important to enjoy time together. But if our child is
constantly attached to our leg or wants to be picked up all the time, we can help them
play alone for longer periods.
•• First, we can play together. Then we can play a little less and watch more. Let them
lead the play. Over time, we can sit a little farther away while we watch them.
•• Give them our undivided attention and then leave for a moment, telling them that
we are going to the kitchen to put the kettle on, going to put laundry in the washer,
or something similar. Come straight back. Then pop out again to make the cup of tea
or do another little job and come straight back. This gets them used to us going away
and coming back.
•• When they want to stay with us, don’t feel irritated but make it a little bit boring. For
example, we can chat with the other parents at a birthday party while they stand with
us. If they feel ready, they may go join the other children all by themselves.

Do it together
Include them in daily life. We will find that with age, they will start to play more
independently, but in the meantime, we can enjoy that they want to spend time with us.
•• Use a stepladder so they can help in the kitchen.
•• Let them press the buttons on the washing machine.
•• Give them the socks to make into pairs while we do laundry, and so on.
•• Our child may say “Mommy do it”—give a little help and step back to see if they can
manage the rest themselves. Stay close at first so they still feel safe and secure.

171

Understand our child
•• See things from our child’s perspective and acknowledge their feelings. Instead of
saying, “Don’t worry, it will be okay,” we can provide understanding: “Are you feeling
scared about this?” This doesn’t mean we have to solve the problem; it just lets them
know we understand.
•• Fill their emotional bucket. Starting the day with a long cuddle and reading books
can fill our child’s emotional tank before the day gets busy. And when they start to
get whiny, rather than looking for more space, we can offer them a cuddle to help
them rebalance.
•• Our child’s “love language” may be touch or spending time together. This child will
enjoy a lot of contact with us to feel loved. (See The Five Love Languages by Gary
Chapman for more on this.)
•• An introverted child may find groups overwhelming. They may need to stay with us
at first, or we may want to make our visit shorter to accommodate our child’s needs.

Make them feel safe
•• If we are going somewhere new, give them a little tour when they arrive so they feel
oriented.
•• Always tell them where we are going rather than sneaking out. “I’m just going to the
toilet. I’ll be back in two minutes.” Our child may cry, but over time they’ll begin to
trust that we’ll come back when we say we will.
•• It can help to arrive a little early to parties or group activities. It can be daunting for
some children to walk into a room already full of busy children.
I like to think of our child’s excursions like petals on a flower, with us at the center. They
will make small excursions first, crawling to the other side of the room and coming
back; walking farther away as they grow in independence and then coming back; then
going off to school and coming back; and one day biking themselves to high school and
coming back at the end of the day to check in with us.
If they are clingy, we can help them feel safe enough to explore, maybe just a little before
they check in; they will gradually explore longer and go farther, and then they’ll be back
again soon to check in with us. Even though my children are now teenagers, I am still an
important check-in point for them before they head off again to explore further.

172

SC R E E N TI M E
In a Montessori approach, we want to offer our toddler many hands-on and firsthand
experiences of their world. Screens don’t provide such rich sensorial learning.
The website Screen-Free Parenting offers a lot of useful research on screens, including
this:
•• Young children do not learn language from a screen—they learn language best from
a personal relationship with another human.
•• Screens can negatively affect children’s sleep and attention levels.
•• There is concern about physical health—children could spend screen time being
active and/or outdoors.

What to do instead
To remove temptation, put screens out of sight and out of reach. We can also be
conscious of our own use of screens while our children are around.
If they are bored in a cafe, take them for a walk to see the kitchen staff at work, or bring
some books to read and an activity to do together.
Rather than using a screen to help calm our child if they are upset, use the ideas from
chapter 6 and they will learn to identify their feelings, learn to calm down, and learn
from the difficult times.

My personal experience with screens
My children had very little exposure to screens and electronic toys when they were
young. The television was not left on in the background, and we brought along things
like books to read when we were out in cafes. From time to time, they saw some carefully
selected television programs or short films.
In my children’s Montessori school, once the children were 6+ years, there were
2 computers for 30 children, and they would book time if they wanted to research
something.

173

Around the same time, we chose to allow a limited amount of screen time at home.
We carefully chose which programs or games they were watching or using, and there
was always supervision. This also gave them an idea of what their friends were talking
about at school.
For those worried that their child will be left behind, I’ve found that my children
are still very competent on computers. For example, they can build a website, write
presentations, and code some simple games with introductory coding programs.

For more ideas about the “whys” and “hows” of limiting screens,
I recommend the book Toxic Childhood: How the Modern World
Is Damaging Our Children and What We Can Do About It, by
Sue Palmer. It is very realistic and proactive about how to deal
with things like technology with our children.

B I LI N G UA LI S M
Because toddlers have an absorbent mind and are in a sensitive period for language
acquisition, it is a wonderful time to expose them to more than one language. They will
take in additional languages with little effort, although it does take some effort from the
adult to provide language in a consistent way.
If there is more than one language in the home, we can use the One Person, One
Language (OPOL) approach. Each parent chooses their mother tongue when speaking
with the child, while the family uses one agreed-upon “family language.”
Here is an example:
A family who lived across the road from me had a child. One parent spoke Italian with
the child, the other spoke German with the child, and the parents spoke English with
each other. The child also went to a bilingual day care where they were exposed to Dutch
and English. The child learned to ask for an apple in Italian with one parent and in
German with the other, and if she ever saw me in the street, we would speak in English.
(She now goes to a Dutch school where she studies in Dutch, continues to speak Italian
and German at home, and speaks less English but has relatively high comprehension.)

174

We can also use an approach called Domains of Use. This is where we have agreed-upon
times or places when we use certain languages. For example, on the weekends the family
chooses to speak English; out of the home they choose to speak the local language; and
at home they speak the parents’ mother tongues.
Look at the literacy goals for each of the child’s languages. If the goal is to have the child
be able to eventually study in a language, they need to spend around 30 percent of the
week with that language. Calculate the hours the child is awake and see if it is necessary
to increase their exposure in any language. For example, have a teenager read and play
with our child in that language, a babysitter who speaks that language, or play groups in
that language. Be creative.
Some parents worry that their child will have a language delay if they are being raised
to be bilingual. When they have more than one language, the research shows that they
should not have any learning delay. For comparison, a 1.5-year-old who is monolingual
may have ten words; the bilingual child may have five words in one language and five
words in another. So it can appear that their language level is lower, even though they
can say ten words in total, too.
The research also does not support parents abandoning their mother tongue to encourage
their children to pick up the local language. The mother tongue needs to be strong for
any other languages to be acquired. What we can do is increase their exposure to the
local language to ensure there is enough input.

I recommend A Parents’ and Teachers’ Guide to Bilingualism
by Colin Baker for anyone with questions about bilingualism or
learning more than one language.

175

TO P R AC T I C E
1. 	How can we increase connection during daily care?
2. 	H ow can we support our child’s eating/sleeping/toileting?
Can we let go of our anxiety in these areas?
3. 	C an we keep neutral in conflicts with siblings?
4. 	H ow can we build skills with our child
- around sharing?
- to interrupt an adult?
- if they are an introverted child?
- if they hit/bite/push/throw?
- to build concentration?
- to deal with frustration?
- when they are clingy?

When we apply Montessori principles at home in this way, we are learning to be the
child’s guide. We are kind and clear when needed. We help them scaffold the skills they
will need. And we cultivate connection with our child every day.

B E I N G TH E AD U LT

8
178

Preparation of the adult

179

Physical self-care

180 Cultivate a learning mind-set
180 Start and end the day right
182

Practice presence

183

Observation

183

Fill our emotional bucket and our child’s

184

Slow down

186

Be the child’s guide

187

Use our home as a helper

188

Be honest

188

Take responsibility for our life and choices

189

Learn from our mistakes

190 Celebrate where we are
190 Self-awareness
191

Keep practicing

178

P R E PA R ATI O N O F TH E A D U LT
Dr. Montessori was well aware of the work we need to do on ourselves. She called this
preparation of the adult. How can we be the best model for our children? How can we
stay calm with an unpredictable toddler in the home? What might we be bringing to the
situation? What unresolved issues are showing up here?
We are not aiming to be perfect parents. When I tried to be (or appeared to be) a
perfect parent, I was stressed and disconnected from my family, busy worrying about
everything. Rather, we are aiming to have fun and feel relaxed with our families,
starting from where we are today. Maybe some of these ideas can help us to parent from
a calmer place—a place where we can support and guide our toddler.
We cannot change our partner, only how we react to them. The same is true with our
children. Who knew that parenting would become an almost spiritual journey?
And what a journey it is. Sometimes I wish I had known all of this before I became a
parent. Yet, we know only what we know. So I think of how I’ve grown up alongside my
children—that they see me trying and getting it wrong and trying again and getting a bit
better, constantly learning and growing.
What I have learned may not work for every family. I don’t want to tell other people how
to live. Instead, I’d like to share some of my practices that have helped me as a parent
and Montessori teacher, including apologizing and “doing it over” when I get it wrong.

179

P H YS I CA L S E LF - CA R E
We do best when we keep our bodies, our minds, and our souls strong and healthy.
To nurture our families, we must also nurture ourselves.
We need good food. Some movement (perhaps biking around town or chasing our
toddler in the park). Time outside every day. Maybe long baths in the evening when no
one can disturb us. We can always look for new ways to add fun or peace to our day.
We can acknowledge the guilt we may feel about putting ourselves first. And let it go.
Reframe it instead as being a great example for our children to look after themselves.
If we are feeling tired or burned out, we can get help. Pushing past our limit is not a
sustainable long-term option. The help could be a babysitter, a grandparent, a friend who
will swap with us, a partner. Our toddler will learn that there are other special people in
their life whom we trust and with whom they will be safe. So it’s a win-win.
If we are feeling depressed, we should absolutely get help from a doctor, even if it is just
to see what options are available. I remember turning up at the doctor when both my
children were still under 2, worried I might be depressed. It helped to have someone to
talk to and to care for me when I was so busy looking after others. If the depression is
concerning, a doctor will help to figure out the next steps.

180

CU LTIVATE A LE A R N I N G M I N D - S ET
We don’t undertake any paid job without some training, and we expect that our child’s
schoolteachers will continue their professional development. So, as a parent, we can keep
learning, too. (By reading this book, you are already cultivating a learning mind-set
about raising your child.)
In addition, we can:
•• Learn more about our child’s unique development.
•• Research things that are different about our child and get the support we need.
•• Find a training like a positive discipline training or a course in nonviolent
communication.
•• Explore many and varied books and resources. (See my recommendations on pages
218 and 219.) Perhaps try listening to podcasts and audiobooks.
•• Read and learn things that have nothing to do with raising children. We need to have
our own rich life as well.
•• Learn to follow our intuition. Our thinking brain is so strong these days, so switching
it off and listening to our intuition—that calm voice inside—is another skill we can
practice.

STA RT A N D E N D TH E DAY R I G HT
My morning and evening rituals probably have the biggest effect on how I show up as a
parent. It’s not strict, but it’s fairly consistent most days. It helps me be intentional about
how I live each day, rather than reacting to what life throws at me. If I can get in good
“alignment” at the beginning of the day, it sets me up for the rest of the day.
Even when my children were toddlers, I would try to wake up half an hour before
anyone else in the house so I could have some quiet time for myself.

181

If we can’t be awake before the rest of the family, consider how we can create a morning
routine that we love that includes them. This might be morning snuggles, reading books,
having breakfast together, putting on some happy music, or making a cup of coffee or
tea to drink while we are all getting ready for our day.
When I wake up before the rest of the family, I use the time in the following ways:
•• I lie in my bed to meditate—it’s impossible to be bad at it. Some days I notice my
mind is super active, and other days I manage to focus on my breath for longer. This
practice really helps me be less reactive during the day. And on those scattered days,
I can come back to that drop of peace I was able to find in the morning.
•• I spend five minutes writing:
- things I am grateful for and appreciate.
- a few things that would make the day amazing (things I actually have control over
and that can be as simple as having a cup of coffee or sitting outside on the steps).
-m
 y intention for the day (for example, to choose ease, to listen to others, or to focus
on love and connection).
•• With any time that is remaining, I start to get dressed before I hear the sound of
lovely children’s feet.
If I am interrupted before I am finished, I try to think of it as a reminder of how lucky
I am to have a lovely family and to hear the sounds of them coming to join me.
At the end of the day, I take a bath and read a book. I write down three amazing things
that happened and an intention for the next day.
We may not think we have time, but it is possible if we make it a priority. I do this
before I read the news or check social media. It makes a big difference in how I can be
my best self.
We can set aside some time to think through what morning and night rituals serve us
best. Just as we look after our families, we will benefit from looking after our own wellbeing in the same way.

182

P R AC TI C E P R E S E N C E
It’s difficult to stay present when we are trying to be all things to all people and being
pulled in lots of directions as adults with lots of commitments, including as parents.
Here are some ways to practice being present:
•• Focus on doing one task at a time. I know I’m not really listening to my children about
their day if I have my back to them while I am preparing something in the kitchen. It
works better for all of us if I tell them that I’d love to hear what they have to say as soon
as I am finished. Or stop what I am doing, listen, and then finish what I am doing.
•• Use a notebook. I always have a few notebooks to write down things I think of when
I am playing a board game with the children or running one of my classes. It’s written
down for when I can look at it at a later time. I “process” the notes later, leaving my
mind free to be present.
•• Use technology consciously. I love technology. Yet we rarely switch off from it. So I
often hide my phone in my bedroom so that I don’t pick it up to check it as I pass by or
as soon as it beeps. Anytime I pick up my phone for one task, I inevitably start looking
at some other app.
•• Calm the mind. It’s not only technology. It’s also our mind. It’s really hard to stay in
the here and now. We continually play back moments from the past and make plans for
the future. We can make ourselves crazy.
Right now, here, in the present moment, there is nothing to worry about. Hold this book
and just breathe in. Then breathe out. For that short moment there was nothing to think
about. Being present. Still. I love it when my mind quiets like that.
Imagine if we could spend more time in that peaceful space. With practice we can.
The more we can practice making space for these moments, the easier it is for us to
slow down, to observe our child, to see things from their perspective. The more time we
spend finding a calm space inside ourselves, the easier it will be for us to return to that
space when we need to be a calm leader for our child while they are having a hard time.
And guess who is great at being in the present moment to help us practice? Our toddlers.
Remember how they squeal with excitement at the sound of an airplane. How they find
flowers to pick in the most unexpected of places. How they wriggle their toes in the grass
at the park.
Follow them and learn.

183

O B S E RVATI O N
As discussed in chapter 5, observation is a tool Montessori teachers use a lot. We
discussed how we can make factual observations at home, too, to allow us to let go of
judgment, bias, and other analysis.
I include it again here because observation can help us:
•• remove our judgment of the situation, which stops us from being triggered by our
child’s behavior, and allows us to respond rather than react. (Instead of “They are
always dropping their bowl on the floor,” we observe, “The bowl dropped onto the
floor.”)
•• really see our child objectively with fresh eyes
•• be more present and notice more details about our child and the world around us
•• connect with our child as we see things from their perspective and gain a greater
understanding of them
If we are feeling wound up, we can grab a notebook and observe. If we have our hands
full, we can try to observe without writing it down. Stay away from analysis, and enjoy
the present moment observing our child.

F I LL O U R E M OTI O N A L B U C K ET
A N D O U R C H I LD ’ S
We all have an emotional bucket. Our emotional bucket is full when we feel safe, secure,
loved, and accepted. It needs to be continuously refilled. When we neglect our emotional
buckets, we become more reactive.
We are responsible for filling our own buckets, for finding ways to look after ourselves,
and for making sure we are receiving the help and support we need. Our partners are
not the only ones who can help here. With a little creativity, we can come up with lots of
ways to fill our bucket.

184

Some ideas:
•• make a cup of tea or coffee
•• play some music
•• have a Skype conversation with grandparents
•• go outside
•• invite friends around for a meal
•• bake something
•• arrange a night out (by ourselves, with our partner, with friends)
•• do a babysitting swap with a friend
When our bucket is full, it is easier to fill our child’s bucket. The easiest way to fill a
child’s bucket is with connection—making them feel the belonging, significance, and
acceptance we discussed in chapter 5. We can spend some time reading books with
them, have a snuggle in our pajamas, laugh. This fills our child’s emotional bucket (and
our own) and helps them be more receptive and less reactive throughout the day.

S LOW D OW N
Going slowly is a tool we can use in our daily life to live with more ease with a toddler,
older children, and our family.
We speed through our days, often worried we’ll miss out on something. Yet, I know how
much more I get out of every day when I slow down and use all my senses: smell the rain
in the air before a storm, feel the wind on my cheeks as I cycle through the city, taste and
enjoy every bite of food rather than eating on the run, and so on.
We will have to figure out what is really important to us and what will have to wait or
not happen at all.
For me, going slowly means things like:
•• sitting down for a cup of tea when I get home from class rather than immediately
starting on the innumerable tasks waiting for me
•• putting on some music to make the moment richer
•• cooking wholesome food and enjoying the cooking process, remembering to savor
the tastes as I eat
•• not putting too many things in my calendar so I don’t have to rush from one thing to
the next

185

•• saying “no” to a lot, so I can say “yes” to more time with my family and friends and,
sometimes, the couch
•• being selective about what I work on, choosing only things I enjoy and that will have
the most impact
•• reading every night
•• a weekend of travel to new places and in nature to recharge, and taking in more of an
impression than having to see everything­—the simpler the better
Toddlers will appreciate our slower pace, making it easier for them to absorb all that is
around them.
Here are some examples:
•• When dressing, first allow them to try; then step in to show them when they need
help, using slow, precise movements.
•• Slow down when we show our child how to carry a basket or a tray—use two hands so
they can be successful themselves when they try.
•• Slowly move chairs using two hands.
•• When singing together, sing slowly and do the actions slowly as well. This allows time
for our child to process and perhaps join us in singing or doing the actions.
•• If we ask our child to do something, like sitting down to eat, count to ten in our head
before repeating to allow time for the child to process our request.
•• Go slowly when we are encouraging our child’s curiosity, too (see chapter 5)—going
at their pace, rushing less, and saving more time for play and exploration.
For more ideas, I enjoyed the book In Praise of Slow by Carl Honoré. It’s not at all
scientific, just one person’s attempt to try out different genres from the slow movement
philosophy. Spoiler alert! The final chapter is my favorite. It concludes that it is ideal
to go slowly most of the time so when we do need to hurry, our children will be more
accommodating.
One last thing. Unless our child is in immediate danger, there is generally enough time
to at least count to three in our head before reacting to any situation. Pretend to be
Dr. Montessori counting rosary beads before rushing in to help. Go slowly.
It will allow us to respond rather than react.

186

BE MY GUIDE
I DON'T NEED
A S E R VA N T
OR A BOSS

B E TH E C H I LD ’ S G U I D E
When my son was 1 year old, I read the book How to Talk So Kids Will Listen and Listen
So Kids Will Talk. (I’ve referred to it throughout this book, if that is any indication of
what an effect it had, and continues to have, on me.)
The biggest takeaway for me was realizing that my role as a parent is not to rush in to
solve every problem for my children. Rather, we can be there to support them, be their
sounding board, or be their safe place to release whatever frustrations they have had in
their day.
This is an enormous shift. And a huge weight off my shoulders. We are the children’s
guide, planting the seeds but letting them grow. We are their rock in the background,
helping only as much as is necessary but as little as possible.
A guide:
•• gives space for the child to work it out for themselves
•• is available when needed
•• is respectful, kind, and clear
•• will help a child take responsibility when needed
•• will provide a safe, rich environment to explore
•• listens
•• responds rather than reacts
We don’t need to be a boss giving them orders, directing them, or teaching them everything
they need to learn. And we don’t need to be their servant doing everything for them.
We can simply be their guide.

187

U S E O U R H O M E A S A H E LP E R
Just as a Montessori teacher uses the classroom environment as the second teacher (see
chapter 2), we can set up our homes to help us as well. We’ve discussed how to do this in
detail in chapter 4, but I’d like to return to some of those ideas here to illustrate how the
changes we make to support our child can support us as well.
When we are feeling tired, we can look for ways that our home can do more of the work
for us. Here are a few examples:
•• If we find that our child is overly reliant on us, then we can look for ways to add
independence into our daily rhythm.
•• Every time we do something for our toddler that they can do themselves, we can
make a small change so they can do it successfully by themselves—eventually taking
away some of the burden on us. For example, we can add a scoop to a container so
they can serve their own cereal at breakfast time. If they pull all the tissues onto the
floor, we can look for a way to put out a few at a time on a dish and keep the box out
of reach. The options are limited only by our imagination.
•• If we find that we are saying “no” a lot, we can look for ways to change the
environment.
•• If we find that we are spending a lot of time tidying up, we can look for ways to reduce
the number of toys available. We can make more thoughtful selections, observe what
our child is no longer interested in, or find ways to support scaffolding the skills
necessary for our child to clean up after themselves.

188

B E H O N E ST
Our children learn more from watching us than from us telling them how to behave. So
we want to model honesty with our children. We want them to learn that being truthful
is an important value in our home. No white lies.
I’d say most people think they are honest. Yet, little white lies are common:
•• “Tell them I’m on the phone.” (When we don’t want to speak to someone.)
•• “What do I think of your haircut? It looks great.” (When we don’t think that at all.)
•• “I don’t have any money on me.” (To a person asking for money on the street.)
Instead we could say:
•• To an unwanted call, “I’m tired right now. Can I call you back tomorrow?/Can you
send me an email?”
•• About someone’s new haircut, “You look really happy with it.”
•• To a person on the street, “Not today—good luck” or “Can I buy you some fruit in
the shop?”
It is actually really hard to be kind and truthful. It’s something to strive to model.

TA K E R E S P O N S I B I LIT Y FO R O U R LI F E A N D C H O I C E S
There are many things that are difficult or challenging about life that we cannot change. But
we can acknowledge it when some of life’s headaches are a result of choices we’ve made.
If we choose to live in a house with a garden, it will require maintenance. Or if we choose
to live in a cosmopolitan city, it means rents are high. Or if we want a nontraditional
education for our children, it may cost money. We don’t have to change these choices.
Indeed, we are lucky to be able to make choices about these things at all. We can own
these choices and the resulting responsibilities.
We can also model accepting responsibility for our choices to our children, commenting
out loud when we run into a frustrating problem. “The train is late again! I’m grateful to

189

live in a city with public transportation, but I’m not feeling very patient today. Next time
we could leave earlier.” We can observe ourselves neutrally and, with some distance,
calm down and adjust our perspective.
We can take all the shoulds out of our life and do only the things we want to do. “I
should iron these shirts.” “I should cook the children’s dinner.” “I should call her back.”
“I should pay more attention to my children.” This may seem like I’m advising against
cooking dinner or paying attention to our children. Rather, I’m saying we cook dinner
because we want to provide a nutritious home-cooked dinner for our children. Own that
choice. I’m saying we pay attention to our children because we want them to grow up
feeling secure and accepted. Own that, too.
Every time we say “should,” we can think about whether it’s important to us. Otherwise
we can be creative and change it. And for the things we cannot change, we can see these
as opportunities to be creative. If we work full-time, we can apply these ideas on the
weekends, during mealtimes and bath times, and on our morning drop-off. If we cannot
afford a school that offers the perfect setting, we can find one that complements our
family values. And if we can’t find that, we can keep applying the principles from this
book to our daily life.
We can figure out what is important and preserve it. When we take ownership of our
life and our choices, we are steering the ship that is our life rather than pulling the ropes
senselessly against the storm.

LE A R N F RO M O U R M I STA K E S
When we make a mistake, it is easy to blame someone or something else. For example,
our toddler drove us crazy so we lost our temper, or the map was not clear so we went
the wrong way. Just as we take ownership of our choices, we need to own our mistakes
as well. There are days we are not going to have as much patience. When we get things
wrong. When we do something that means we let our child down, our partner down,
ourselves down.
Making mistakes means that we have an opportunity to apologize. And to think about
what we could have done instead. I can always say to my child (or anyone, for that
matter), “I’m so sorry. I should not have . . . What I could have said/done is . . .” This sets
a far stronger example for our child than blaming someone else. They see that we can
learn from our mistakes, and it shows that we are always trying to make kinder choices.
And that no one, not even their parent, is perfect.

190

C E LE B R ATE W H E R E W E A R E
We can be so busy trying to improve things that we forget to reflect on the present. I
know that I forget to acknowledge and accept where I am right now while I am striving
to learn more and be a better model for my child.
We often forget to say to ourselves, We are enough. We are doing our best.
I like to imagine that we are all full glasses of water. Rather than looking to others to fill
our glass—our partner, our children, our work—we are full just as we are.
That gives me a huge sense of relief. It doesn’t mean that I will stop learning and stop
improving, but I feel okay with who I am today. That means I feel like I can be more to
those in my life, including my children.
I also like to think of our toddlers as full glasses. They are doing the best they can in
their little bodies where they are today. We can support them without being frustrated
by them or angry with them.

S E LF -AWA R E N E S S
To parent in this way takes an increasing amount of self-awareness. In our Montessori
training, this is part of self-observation.
We need to recognize when our limits are about to be tested and find a way to assert
our limits—with kindness and clarity. If we let a situation build up, and we get irritated,
it is almost impossible to calmly step in and provide clear guidance.
It’s okay to have limits. It is part of being aware of ourselves and our needs, and
balancing them with the needs of our children and others in our family. (See chapter 9
on working together with others.)
When we find ourselves being triggered, we can observe ourselves. Are we taking on
our child’s problem? Is it bringing up something that we don’t like about ourselves?

191

We can step back to take a look objectively or write it down so we can figure it out later,
when we are calm. We can give ourselves compassion and see which of our needs are not
being met (for example, need for connection or to be cared for), and brainstorm ways to
meet those needs.
Then we can move back to being the guide, the confident leader, the rock our child needs
us to be.

K E E P P R AC TI C I N G
All the ideas in this book will take practice. Being this way with our child is like
learning a new language and takes a whole lot of practice. I’m still practicing, and my
children are becoming young adults, and I’ve been working as a Montessori teacher for
years.
But it does get easier and more natural every day.
“The child developing harmoniously and the adult improving himself at his
side make a very exciting and attractive picture . . . This is the treasure we
need today—helping the child become independent of us and make his way
by himself and receiving in return his gifts of hope and light.”
—Dr. Maria Montessori, Education and Peace

TO P R AC T I C E
1. 	What brings us into alignment during the day? Are we happy?
Are our needs being met?
2. 	C an we be more present? Slower?
3. 	C an we shift from being our child’s boss or servant to being their guide?
4. 	C an we use our home to save us some work?
5. 	Are we blaming others for our life situation?
Can we take responsibility for our choices? Or change them?
6. 	C an we celebrate where we are today?

WO R KI N G
TO G ETH E R

9

194

What about everyone else?

195

Parents are people, too

195

Preferring one parent

196

The key to working together as a family

197

Getting family on board

199

Grandparents and caregivers

200 When there is conflict in the family
201

Divorce does not have to be a dirty word

194

W H AT A B O UT E V E RYO N E E L S E?
We don’t parent alone. There are many ways of being in a family—married, partners,
single parent, living with grandparents, opposite or same-sex parents, divorced,
from different cultural backgrounds, and so on. The number and types of family
constellations will only grow as our society evolves.
No matter what our family constellation, we live in the context of the people around
us as well—an extended family. These may or may not be blood relatives but could also
include friends, friends from parenting groups, school friends, or the people in the local
shop where we purchase our groceries. These are the people in the life of our family.
Many questions come up when we are parenting alone, with a partner, and with
extended family.
•• Maybe we have read this book and would love our “family” to also try some of the
ideas mentioned here. How do we get them on board?
•• What are our family values, anyway?
•• Do we listen and speak to our family as we do to our toddler?
•• Where do an adult’s feelings stand in this child-driven approach?
•• What if our toddler prefers one parent?
•• What about a grandparent or caregiver? How can they apply this approach?
•• What if we are separated from our partner? How will it affect our child? And how can
it remain a positive experience for the child?
These are important questions. Here are some thoughts that align with the Montessori
approach to get us started.

195

PA R E NT S A R E P EO P LE , TO O
It is easy to end up making life all about the children. We put our own needs on hold or
feel guilty if we do something for ourselves.
We are all people, deserving of having our needs met. Following the child does not
mean ignoring ourselves. Work together with our child. Be assertive if we need to be.
We allow our children a lot of freedom. But we can express our needs, too—for example,
wanting some peace in the evening while our child rests in bed. (You may wish to refer
to the table of feelings and needs on page 232.)
Make time for the adult relationship. Our partner, if we have one, is a person, too. And
that relationship is very important. Without it, we might not have become a parent in
the first place. However, we often forget to prioritize it.
I love the example I once heard about a French family with four children. When the
parent who was working outside the home returned to the house each evening, the
parents would sit down and have a glass of wine, check in, and connect with each other
for about ten minutes rather than rushing to prepare dinner and into the usual evening
routine. The parents did not jump up to rush to their children’s rescue during this time.
Their children learned that this was their parents’ special time. They were showing their
children that their relationship was important.
And that their parents are people, too.

P R E F E R R I N G O N E PA R E NT
Toddlers and children may go through phases of favoring one parent. They want only
this parent to bathe them, read to them, dress them, or tuck them into bed.
If this continues, it can be upsetting and alienating for the other parent.
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to this situation, but here are some things to consider.

196

Is the child looking for a reaction? I think in many of these cases, the toddler is looking
for clarity and is testing limits. We don’t need to react or give in to their demands. If
they push away one parent, that parent can gently acknowledge the toddler’s feelings.
“You wanted someone else to help you. And I’m helping you today.” Remain calm,
gentle, and confident.
Look for changes at home. If one parent has been traveling a lot, or there is a change
at home like a new baby or moving to a different house, this can be the way the child
expresses themselves; it’s one thing they can try to control when everything else is out of
their control. It does not mean that we need to change caregivers to meet their demands.
But they may need some extra understanding and cuddles, and for us to see things from
their perspective.

TH E K E Y TO WO R K I N G TO G ETH E R
A S A FA M I LY
I believe the key to working together as a family is to recognize that each one of us has
needs and to be creative in finding ways to make sure everyone’s needs are met. It won’t
be easy, but it’s possible. Or at least we can start the conversation.

Working with our child
The adult is in charge, but the child can definitely have input into how to solve problems.
“You really want to keep playing outside, and I’m ready to go in. How can we solve the
problem?” We can do this even with preverbal children. Revisit chapter 6 for specific
suggestions.

Working with our partner
I truly think that, with some flexibility and understanding, everyone’s needs can be met.
Let’s take a regular weekend afternoon as an example. It is time to go to the supermarket,
the children would like to go to the playground, our partner would like a nap, and we
would like to meet a friend for a coffee.
Rather than bribing the children by saying, “We’ll go to the park if you are good,” we can
choose to plan something for everyone that is not conditional. Perhaps we can go to the

197

supermarket without the children and then take them to the playground while our partner
naps. Or we order the groceries online and our friend comes to visit us at home while the
children play and our partner naps. Any combination or other solution is possible.

Working with others
Our toddlers will have other people to care for them other than us. They may have a
grandparent or babysitter look after them, or they may go to day care or school.
They will learn that there are other people in the world whom their parents trust with
their care. They will learn to trust others. And they will learn a lot from other people’s
knowledge of the world. The child’s world will be enriched by these interactions.
When we find someone we trust with the care of our toddler, our child will sense it. The
best advice I received from my children’s Montessori preschool teacher was to give them a
big positive, yet short, goodbye. “Have a lot of fun and I’ll see you after story time.” I think
I said the same thing every day. It reassured me, and it reassured them. When they ran out
of class, I’d welcome them with a hug if they wanted it and say, “It’s so lovely to see you.” I
did not need to tell them how much I missed them—that is a lot for a toddler to carry.
What they do need is the message that their parent trusts this person, so they trust them, too.
They also need to trust us in this process, so we should let them know if we are leaving and
be okay with the fact that this may cause them some sadness. This is easier for the child
than disappearing without telling them, having them suddenly notice we aren’t there, and
not being able to understand where we have gone or when we are coming back.

G ET TI N G FA M I LY O N B OA R D
It is impossible to change someone else: not our children, our partner, or our family.
We want them to take on these Montessori ideas. Yet we cannot force this upon them.
Do not despair.
We can start with ourselves. I often think the best thing we can do is to keep practicing.
Often people will notice that we are parenting differently, and then ask for more information.
“I see that you did not shout at your child when he was upset in the playground. Can you tell

198

me more?” We are models not only for our children, but for others around us. Some will be
curious and ask. But not everyone. That’s okay, too.
Find different ways to share the information. Pass along a short article. Share a story
about someone who is following a similar approach. Find a radio program or podcast
episode that touches on one aspect that might resonate. Pass on this book. Forward a
newsletter. Watch an online workshop with them. Get them to come to an in-person
workshop at a Montessori school. Have conversations. Drip. Drip. Drip. Slow and steady
information, easy to digest, in small doses, at a pace they are open to trying.
Watch how we talk with our family. Often we want our family to speak to our child in
a gentle way, without correcting them, limiting criticism, and encouraging them. Then
we end up talking to, and listening to, our family in exactly the way we are trying not to
with our child. We correct them if they say the wrong thing. We get frustrated at their
impatience. We end up talking over them and not showing them respect.
Acknowledge our family’s feelings and translate for them. No one is right and no one
is wrong. Just as we have learned to see from our child’s perspective, we can also learn to
see from the perspective of members of our family.
We may not like the way they talk or interact with our child, but we can always translate
for them.
“It sounds like Grandad does not want you to climb on the couch.”
“It sounds like your mother does not want you to throw your food.”
“You two are having a hard time with each other. Let me know if you want me to help.”
We can use the same idea on the playground, with neighbors, or with relatives with
whom we may not agree. We can translate for them, too.
Go for agreement on the big family values. With enough wisdom, we can have
conversations in which our family can find points of agreement. For example, we
may find that we all want the best for the child. That we want them to grow up to be
respectful and responsible. That we want them to be curious but that we all have our
own limits.
Within this big picture, our toddler will learn that each person in their family has their
own unique approach. Indeed, they will learn naturally who to go to when they want to
be silly, who to go to when not everything is right in their world, and so on.
What a lucky child to have so many people caring for them. Even if we are not in contact
with our immediate family, they can receive a lot of care from the village around us.

199

G R A N D PA R E NT S
A N D CA R EG IV E R S
If you are a grandparent or caregiver, this section is for you. You can apply any of the
techniques mentioned in this book.
At first this approach may seem very different from the one you are used to and that may
have served you well with your own children. Here are a few easy ways to start. If you
like this approach, you can learn more about it by reading more of this book.
1.	Watch the child. Take your cues from them. What are they interested in? Is it okay
for them to explore freely? How can you let them explore while making sure they are
safe?
2.	See if they can work it out themselves. Whether it is trying to feed or dress
themselves or struggling with a toy, give them a little time to see if they can figure it
out themselves. The joy on their face when they manage is priceless.
3.	What do you enjoy that you may be able to share with them? Sharing your interests
can help the child have rich experiences. Do you play an instrument? Have some
beautiful handcraft materials they can explore? Enjoy playing a sport that you could
simplify to show them?
4.	Explore outside. If you are worried about them breaking something or keeping them
entertained, head outside to a park, playground, or walking trail, or simply walk to
the local shops. Let them show you everything they see­—you can name what they
show you—and talk about it.
5.	Give feedback about what you see. Rather than simply praising them by saying,
“Good job,” let them know what you saw. “I saw you swinging all by yourself.” “You
ran all the way to the top of the hill and rolled down. That looked like fun.” We are
trying to allow them to judge for themselves rather than to look for external approval.

200

6.	Give your presence, not your presents. Gift giving can be fun. It can show your love.
But what shows your love even more than another toy is your time. If you really want
to buy a gift, consider buying tickets for the zoo so you can visit together, a book
you can enjoy on the couch, or a gift card for their parents to have a meal while you
babysit. Having less stuff means we can stay on this planet longer together. We want
to show our children how to care for their environment, as well as for themselves and
others.
7.	What values do you share with their parents? This common ground is a good place
to start. It will show some consistency for the toddler who likes order. Some of your
rules may be different, which the toddler will learn. As long as the big picture is the
same, the child will feel safe and secure in their relationship with both you and their
parents.
8.	Can you give the parents a sense of belonging, significance, and acceptance?
Usually differences of opinion within the extended family (caregivers included)
indicate a longing for acceptance. Even adults have an inner child wanting to be loved
and accepted for who we are. Showing the child’s parents that you understand their
perspective can go a long way toward creating space for the differences.

W H E N TH E R E I S CO N F LI C T
I N TH E FA M I LY
To help us communicate our concerns and hear the concerns of the other member(s) of
the family, try this active listening exercise. All that is needed is to ask the other party if
they have twenty minutes. This technique is adapted from Dr. Scilla Elworthy’s keynote
address at the 2017 Montessori Congress.
For the first five minutes, the other person can talk about whatever is bothering them.
Listen, hear what they say, and notice the feelings that are coming up for them.
For the following five minutes, we tell them what we heard them say and what we think
they were feeling. They can let us know if we misunderstood anything.
Then we switch roles. Now we can talk for five minutes about anything that is bothering
us, while they listen.

201

In the last five minutes, they let us know what we said and any feelings they noticed
coming up for us. We can also let them know if they didn’t understand anything
correctly.
If it feels like the conflict would benefit from another session, we may want to repeat the
process for another twenty minutes.
We will start to see the other person and their needs and how we are all human and just
want to get our needs met.
Tip 1
Try to avoid language that blames the other person. For example, say, “It’s important
for me to be respected” rather than “You don’t respect me.” Use “I” statements, make
observations, and identify feelings and needs.
Tip 2
Make requests, not demands, of others. There are always many ways to solve a problem if
we are creative, so be open to other solutions, too.
You can find a table of feelings and needs in the appendix (see page 232).

D IVO RCE DO E S N OT H AV E TO
B E A D I RT Y WO R D
When parents decide to separate, it is possible to transition to an amicable family
arrangement where the child simply has two parents living in different homes. Ideally, a
co-parenting arrangement can be reached where parents have shared responsibility and
both have time with the child.
Even in the 1900s, Dr. Montessori acknowledged that both parents played an important
role for the child, as long as there is no psychological or physical reason for a child not to
have contact with one of the parents. The child’s safety is the first priority.
There is still a stigma around separation and divorce. It is sad when a relationship
between parents ends. But it does not have to be negative. In fact, if both parents are
happier as a result, it can be a more positive experience for the child who, even at a

202

young age, can sense the atmosphere in the house when there is fighting, disagreement,
and disharmony.
Stability is important for the child at this time. Have a regular schedule with each
parent so the child knows what to expect. We have discussed how toddlers have a strong
sense of order. Make it a priority.
Be honest with the child in an age-appropriate way. Don’t assume they are too young to
know what is going on. On the other hand, they don’t need to know all the details.
Be factual and keep them involved and updated as the situation evolves.
Being kind about the other parent in the child’s company is critical. The parents’
commitment to speaking kindly to and about each other when the child is present is
paramount. Sometimes it will be very difficult, in which case we can physically step away
from the conflict and discuss the matter later. We can talk to our friends, our family, or
a counselor about difficulties we are having with the other parent, but not to the child.
It is not fair to put the child in the middle.
Remember, we are both still the child’s parents, their family; we’re just not living
together.

TO P R AC T I C E
1. 	Are our needs being met? If not, brainstorm ways to meet our needs.
2. 	I s there a way that everyone in the family can have their needs met?
Be creative.
3. 	W hat ideas would help to get family on board?
4. 	Are there any conflicts that need to be resolved? Try the exercise from the
section “When there is conflict in the family” (see page 200).

W H AT ’ S N E XT

10

204 Getting ready for preschool/school
205 The coming years
209 It’s time for a change in education
209 It’s time for peace

204

G ET TI N G R E A DY
FO R P R E SC H O O L /SC H O O L
Here are a few tips for those families who will be getting ready for preschool or school
soon, particularly if the child will be going to a Montessori school.
The first thing is to practice skills of independence. For example, we can look for
ways to support putting on their own jacket, being able to get their shoes on and off by
themselves, and learning to wipe their nose.
Next is to practice separation. Particularly if there has not been another caregiver
helping with the toddler, we will want to practice this skill just as we would any other
skill. We can start with having someone come to our house to read and play together.
Once the child is comfortable with them, we could make a short trip to run errands
(being sure to tell them as we are leaving, even if our child is sad about it). They will
learn that we come back. We can build up to longer periods apart until they are used to
being away from us for the same amount of time as they will be at school.
Finally, something they will do throughout their lives is practicing social skills. At
the playground, we can help translate for them so they learn to use their words, guide
them to stand up for themselves if needed, and model care of others. This will provide
them with the support they need to be ready to learn how to get along with, and care for,
others in their new school.

Montessori materials at home
When our child starts school, it’s best not to have the same Montessori materials at
home. There are several reasons for this:
•• They may be spending up to six hours a day at school and will be much more engaged
with using and learning from the materials if they are found only in their classroom.
•• We do not want to present the materials in a way that is different from how they learn
at school—this may be confusing for them.
•• They also need time for unstructured playtime, time outside, being involved in our
daily lives, and simply catching up with friends.
The one Montessori activity from the classroom that my children’s Montessori teacher
said was okay to do at home was to play “I spy with my little eye something beginning
with . . .” The only difference from regular “I spy” is that this game uses the phonetic
sound of the letter rather than its name. For example, buh is used instead of b for a ball,
tr instead of t for a tree.

205

TH E CO M I N G Y E A R S
Dr. Montessori developed an overview of a child’s development from the age of 0 to 24
years based on her scientific observations. She called this the four planes of development.
It may be a surprise that she considered us children until the age of 24. Now brain
research shows that the prefrontal cortex of the brain—the area for rational decision
making and controlling social behavior—keeps developing until our early twenties. More
than a hundred years later, brain research is backing up what Dr. Montessori observed.
In each plane of development, with each plane being six years in length, Dr. Montessori
recognized similarities in a child’s physical, psychological, and behavioral development.
Let’s see what lies ahead after the toddler years.

Infancy (0 to 6 years): the first plane of development
The purpose of these first six years is for the child to gain physical and biological
independence from their parent. With such enormous changes taking place during this
time, it is generally a very volatile period.
The child goes through significant physical change in this period—growing from a baby
entirely dependent on an adult into a child able to walk, talk, and eat by themselves.
Moving toward independence also means sometimes wanting to be close to the parent
and other times pushing us away or wanting to do everything for themselves—a kind
of crisis of independence. The child also does a lot of testing to make sense of the world
around them.
The absorbent mind is also active during this whole period, with children from birth
to 6 years being able to absorb all the information around them like a sponge. In the
first three years of this cycle (0–3 years) the child absorbs this information completely
unconsciously and without effort—i.e., with an unconscious absorbent mind. In the
second three years (3–6 years) the child becomes a conscious learner, the conscious
absorbent mind.
What does this mean in practice? The child moves from simply accepting and adapting to
the world around him (0–3 years) to a child asking why and how (3–6 years). They want
to understand all that they have taken in during the first three years. They also become
fascinated by other cultures and enjoy maps of the world, flags, and landforms. They may
also show interest in reading, writing, and mathematics using concrete learning materials.

206

They are sensorial learners in this plane, even in the womb. From 0 to 3 they are using
all their senses to explore the world around them. From 3 to 6 they begin to classify
these sensations, for example, big and small, hard and soft, rough and smooth, or loud
and quiet.
They are based in reality in this period—they understand most easily the world they see
around them and are fascinated with seeing how things work. Imaginative play may be
seen from around 2.5+ years as they make sense of the world around them, for example,
playing store or families.
This period is also when the child lays down their personality. Their experience in these
early years will greatly shape who they are in their adult years.
We are indeed planting the seeds . . .

Childhood (6 to 12 years): the second plane of development
Where the first-plane child was working on physical and biological independence, the
second-plane child is working on their mental independence. They are driven to know
everything and to explore the reason behind things, no longer simply absorbing the
information.
They are beginning to develop independent thought about the world around them and
developing their moral sense. They start to explore the gray areas. “Is it right or wrong?”
“Is it fair or unfair?”
They explore the world with their imagination—able to understand history and to
project ideas into the future. This is also a collaborative age where they love to work in
groups around large tables or on the floor.
There is not so much rapid growth in this period, so it might be nice for parents to
hear that this is a more stable period and the child is less volatile. The foundation is
already laid in the first six years when we set clear limits; in the second plane, our child
understands the limits and does not need to challenge them every time.
The stem is growing tall and strong . . .

Adolescence (12 to 18 years): the third plane of development
The adolescent period has much in common with the first plane, so for parents who
think that toddlers and teenagers are similar, Dr. Montessori would agree.

207

Again this is a period of enormous physical and psychological change as children move
through puberty. And where the infant was becoming physically independent from their
parent, the teenager is working on social independence and moving away from their
families. There is a struggle between sometimes wanting to be part of the family and
other times wanting to be independent—another crisis of independence, this time of a
social variety.
Teenagers love sharing ideas and their ideals with others, particularly ways in which
they would change the world (including developing social policy). Interestingly, Dr.
Montessori observed that they are not actually as academic in this period, at a time
when traditional schools generally become more academic.
Instead, Dr. Montessori proposed an Erdkinder, or farm school, as the perfect learning
environment for a teenager. There they could learn by working the land, selling their
goods at market, and figuring out their place in a social group. There are Montessori
high schools in cities, known as “urban compromises.” They try to apply similar
principles in a city setting.
I want to add a personal note here to say that puberty and teenagers do not have to be
scary. I found that having two teenagers in the house was a pleasure, and they were
lovely people to spend time with.
Leaves and blossoms unfurl, nearing maturity . . .

Maturity (18 to 24 years): the fourth plane of development
Dr. Montessori said that if everything has been done in the first three planes of
development, the fourth plane takes care of itself. She referred to this plane’s work as
developing spiritual and moral independence.
These young adults primarily want to give back to society, for example, through
volunteer work or the Peace Corps. They may enter college and join the workforce.
Similar to the second plane of development, this is a more stable period, and the young
adult has a reasoning, logical mind. They are busy exploring areas of interest in work
and study at a deep level.
And their brains are nearly completely formed.
The plant is fully grown, still requiring our care and attention, but now completely
independent of us.

208

FO U R P L A N E S O F D E V E LO P M E NT

FIRST PLANE

SECOND PLANE

THIRD PLANE

FOURTH PLANE

0–6 years

6–12 years

12–18 years

18–24 years

We are planting
the seeds.

The stem is growing
tall and strong.

Leaves and blossoms
unfurl, nearing
maturity.

The plant is fully
grown.

• physical and
biological
independence

• mental
independence

• social
independence

• spiritual and moral
independence

• absorbent mind
• concrete
understanding
of the world
• sensorial learner
• children work
in parallel with
small amounts of
collaboration
• rapid growth
and change

• developing
• developing social
moral sense
policy (how they
(right and wrong)
would change
and exploring
the world)
how things work and
• sharing ideas and
relate
ideals with others
• moves from
• enormous physical
concrete to
and psychological
abstract learning
change (similarities
to the first plane)
• mode of learning
through imagination
• collaborates in
small groups
• less growth, more
stable period

• gives back to
society
• reasoning, logical
mind
• more stable period
(similarities to the
second plane)

209

IT ’ S TI M E FO R A C H A N G E I N E D U CATI O N
When we become parents, we begin to realize how the current education system is
failing our children. We see an educational system that was built for the Industrial
Revolution to train factory workers, where children sit in rows and memorize facts to
pass tests.
You may be reading this book because you want to raise your children to be able to think
for themselves, research to find answers to their questions, think creatively, be able to
problem solve, work with others, and have meaning in their work.
People like Sir Ken Robinson, an educational and creativity expert, are constantly asking
us to question the education system. To see that traditional schools kill creativity. To see
that we need a revolution in the way our children learn.
I was just like you. I had a toddler and a baby, and I looked at the schooling options
ahead. I was idealistic. I didn’t want my children to learn just so they would pass tests.
I walked into the Montessori classroom and saw there could be another way to learn.

IT ’ S TI M E FO R P E AC E
“You have very truly remarked that if we are to teach real peace in this
world, and if we are to carry on a real war against war, we shall have to
begin with children and if they will grow up in their natural innocence, we
won’t have to struggle, we won’t have to pass fruitless idle resolutions,
but we shall go from love to love and peace to peace, until at last all the
corners of the world are covered with that peace and love for which,
consciously or unconsciously, the whole world is hungering.”
—Mahatma Gandhi, Towards New Education

It’s time to take this information to the next level. I want to ask you to help me with my
not-so-surreptitious plan to spread some peace and positivity in the world.
Often we feel helpless and like there is nothing we can do about all the violence in the
world around us. But there is something we can do. We can learn to understand our
toddlers better.

210

Once we can apply these principles with our toddlers, we can start spreading peace
around us with our partners and our families, at school, in the supermarket, with
friends, with strangers, and—most importantly—with people who see the world
differently.
Let’s apply the perspective-taking skills we have learned in this book. Let’s sit in
conversation, listen to each other, and really see each other.
We may have different approaches to raising our children and make different
educational choices. We may have differences of sex, race, ethnicity, politics, sexuality,
religion, and more. All our underlying beliefs and value systems may be different.
I truly believe that who is right is not important. What is important is for us to give
significance to others, to give them belonging, and to accept them for who they are, just
as we have learned to do with our toddlers. Our toddlers are enough, we are enough, and
so is every living thing.
To come to peace in this world is to celebrate our differences, seek the commonalities,
address others’ fears, find peaceful ways to live together, and recognize that we are more
alike than we are different. After all, we are all human.
So where can we start? With understanding our toddlers better. And planting the seeds
to raise beautiful, curious, and responsible human beings.
Dr. Montessori died on May 6, 1952, in Noordwijk aan Zee, in the Netherlands. The
inscription on her tomb says
“I beg the dear all-powerful children to unite with me for the building of
peace in Man and in the World.”

TO P R AC T I C E
1. 	How can we prepare ourselves and our child as they grow from toddler to
preschooler and beyond?
2. 	H ow can we apply the perspective-taking skills learned in this book to our
relationships with:
- neighbors?
- our toddler?
- strangers?
- our partner?
- our family and friends?
- people who see the world differently?

R E AL STO R I E S
H O M E TO U R S AN D Q U OT E S
F R O M M O N T E S S O R I FA M I L I E S

212	Australia
Kylie, Aaron, Caspar, Otis, and Otto
How We Montessori
213	Mongolia
Enerel, Bayanaa, Nimo, and Odi
Mininimoo
214	Canada
Beth, Anthony, and Quentin
Our Montessori Life
215	USA
Amy, James, Charlotte, and Simon
Midwest Montessori
216	My family
Simone, Oliver, and Emma
Australia and the Netherlands
217	My classroom
Jacaranda Tree Montessori
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

212

AUST RA L I A
Kylie, Aaron, Caspar, Otis, and Otto
How We Montessori

“No matter how much you read, I always
recommend parents attend a Montessori
parent-child class and experience
Montessori in person.”
“He is still very hands-on with his learning.
I love to observe him in his element. He
loves to bake sweets, and he gets so much
enjoyment from cooking for his family. He
loves getting messy with his art, and he
loves being around his family. He is still very
snuggly, and we love to curl up together with
a good book.”
“The thing that resonates the most about the
Montessori approach is the way parents are
taught to observe and follow the child. That
each child learns at their own pace. This is
magic.”

213

MO N G O L I A
Enerel, Bayanaa, Nimo, and Odi
Mininimoo

“I felt like my eyes were opened like never
before when I saw the word Montessori. I
could not sleep that day; I searched about
it for the whole night and started preparing
Montessori activities for my son the next day.”
“I think teaching about discipline is much
more important than the activities. Parents
should set an example. We, as parents, also
gain discipline throughout the process.
And learn from the child. This takes a great
amount of effort, but we get so much joy
when the child is interested and learning.”
“Even though my home and our Montessori
room is small, I like to make it appear bigger,
living in a small apartment. I try to squeeze
everything in together and I make fewer
items available at a given time. Always make
a space for the child to explore. And I would
suggest to try to always make a place cozy
and comfortable.”

214

CANA DA
Beth, Anthony, and Quentin
Our Montessori Life

“Our absolute favorite thing to do is to be
in nature with our boys, introducing them to
all the natural world has to offer. So much
natural learning happens when outside.”
“We looked for a way to help our child meet
his needs, on a holistic, individual level. Of
course Montessori was the perfect and
gentle answer.”
“Above all, Montessori has at its center
peace education. It is a pedagogy that has
at its foundation the teaching of peace for
the next generations. No other pedagogy
or learning system has this. It’s why I love
Montessori so much.”
“Montessori at home is about honoring and
respecting the child. Can your child make their
own food? Can they get their own clothes out
of the closet? Do they have access to water
or do you have to get them a drink? Most
importantly, how do you speak to your children
and the other members of your family?”

215

USA
Amy, James, Charlotte, and Simon
Midwest Montessori

“My favorite thing to do with my toddlers is
observe them. Once I have prepared their
environment, I absolutely love just sitting
back and watching them at work. Through
this, I have a glimpse into their minds, and it
so fascinates me. Aside from watching them,
I love spending time with them outdoors
(either in nature or on the streets or in
parks), reading books, listening and making
music, and all things practical life.”
“There is such care and detail placed upon
creating an optimum environment for children
to grow. This includes the preparation of
the adult, which may be the most difficult
part, particularly for a parent. We honor our
children when we prepare ourselves and their
home this way. The rest is up to them.”
“We often think of toddlers as rambunctious,
but if we take time to slow down, give them
space, and observe, I have seen that young
children can become deeply concentrated in
their work.”

216

MY FAMI LY
Simone, Oliver, and Emma
Australia and the Netherlands

“View the world from the child’s perspective.
When we see the world through their eyes,
we gain so much understanding and respect.
And this will help you guide and support the
child.”
“I wanted my children to love learning, not
to just pass tests. When we walked into a
Montessori preschool, I was so touched.
The thought that had been put into the
activities laid out on the shelves. Everything
was so beautiful. I wanted to start exploring
everything myself, so I knew it was the right
environment for my children.”
“I’m constantly inspired as my own
understanding of the Montessori philosophy
deepens. It’s like layers of an onion and
you can just keep peeling back layer after
layer. You can look at Montessori as just an
approach to learning at school. But I love
how Montessori can also be a way of life.”

217

MY C L AS S RO O M
Jacaranda Tree Montessori
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

“Every week I welcome over 100 children
with their parents and carers to learn in a
Montessori environment, offering classes for
babies, toddlers, and preschoolers.”
“The children love to explore the
environment, set up exactly for their age
with everything accessible for them. The
adults learn to observe the children, ask
questions, and meet like-minded families.
I love seeing both the children and the
adults undergoing enormous transformation
through coming to class.”

218

F U RTH E R R E A D I N G

books and lectures by dr. montessori
The Absorbent Mind, Maria Montessori, Holt Paperbacks, 1995
The Child in the Family, Maria Montessori, ABC-CLIO, 1989
Education for a New World, Maria Montessori, ABC-CLIO, 1989
The Formation of Man, Maria Montessori, Association Montessori Internationale, 2007
The Secret of Childhood, Maria Montessori, Fides Publishers, 1966
The Discovery of the Child, Maria Montessori, Ballantine Books, 1986
Maria Montessori Speaks to Parents, Maria Montessori, Montessori-Pierson Publishing Company, 2017
The 1946 London Lectures, Maria Montessori, Montessori-Pierson Publishing Company, 2012

books about the montessori approach
The Joyful Child: Montessori, Global Wisdom for Birth to Three, Susan Mayclin Stephenson,
Michael Olaf Montessori Company, 2013
Child of the World: Montessori, Global Education for Age 3-12+, Susan Mayclin Stephenson,
Michael Olaf Montessori Company, 2013
Understanding the Human Being, Silvana Quattrocchi Montanaro M.D., Nienhuis Montessori, 1991
How to Raise an Amazing Child: The Montessori Way to Bring Up Caring, Confident Children,
Tim Seldin, Dorling Kindersley, 2007
Maria Montessori: Her Life and Work, E. M. Standing, Plume, 1998
Montessori Madness, Trevor Eissler, Sevenoff, 2009
Montessori from the Start, Paula Polk Lillard and Lynn Lillard Jessen, Schocken, 2003

219

books about parenting
Positive Discipline: The First Three Years, Jane Nelsen, Ed. D., Three Rivers Press, 2007
How to Talk So Kids Will Listen and Listen So Kids Will Talk, Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish,
Piccadilly Press, 2013
Siblings Without Rivalry, Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish, W. W. Norton & Company, 2012
The Whole-Brain Child: 12 Proven Strategies to Nurture Your Child’s Developing Mind,
Daniel J. Siegel, MD, and Tina Payne Bryson, MD, Delacorte, 2012
Unconditional Parenting: Moving from Rewards and Punishments to Love and Reason,
Alfie Kohn, Atria Books, 2006
The Sleep Lady’s Good Night, Sleep Tight, Kim West, Vanguard Press, 2010
Thriving!: Raising Confident Kids with Confidence, Character and Resilience, Michael Grose,
Bantam, 2010
Toxic Childhood: How the Modern World Is Damaging Our Children and What We Can Do About It,
Sue Palmer, Orion, 2006
The Creative Family Manifesto: How to Encourage Imagination and Nurture Family Connections,
Amanda Soule, Roost Books, 2008
A Parents' and Teachers' Guide to Bilingualism, Colin Baker, Multilingual Matters, 2014

books on personal development
Nonviolent Communication, Marshall B. Rosenberg, Phd, Puddledancer Press, 2003
Mindset: How We Can Learn to Fulfill Our Potential, Carol S. Dweck, Ballantine Books, 2007
Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can’t Stop Talking, Susan Cain, Penguin Books, 2012
In Praise of Slow: How a Worldwide Movement Is Challenging the Cult of Speed, Carl Honoré,
Orion, 2005
The Five Love Languages, Gary Chapman, Northfield Publishing, 2004

other resources
“Seeing Tantrums as Distress, Not Defiance,” Jenny Anderson, the New York Times, October 30, 2011
“Lexical Development in Bilingual Infants and Toddlers: Comparison to Monolingual Norms,”
Barbara Pearson et al., Language Learning 43, no. 1 (March 1993), 93–120
Sarah Ockwell-Smith,
https://sarahockwell-smith.com/2015/03/19/one-simple-way-to-improve-your-baby-or-child-sleep/
Yoram Mosenzon, Connecting2Life, www.connecting2life.net/
Screen-Free Parenting, www.screenfreeparenting.com
Scilla Elworthy, www.scillaelworthy.com
Sir Ken Robinson, www.sirkenrobinson.com
Rusty Keeler, www.earthplay.net

220

TH A N K-YO U S
I have so much gratitude and appreciation for . . .
HIYOKO—I could not have asked for a more
amazing illustrator for this project. I never
could have dreamed that this book could be
so beautiful. I would send an idea to Hiyoko
to include in the book and it always came
back exactly as I meant and even better than I
expected. Her aesthetic, care, and generosity
are of the highest quality. Thank you, Hiyoko,
for translating my words into this beautifully
illustrated and designed book.
ALEXIS —What a pleasure and honor to have
Alexis and her brain working on this book
with me. I asked Alexis to help me with a bit
of copy editing. It turned into her giving me
feedback on every word in this book. Her light
and sensitive touch made the manuscript even
better.
THE TEAM AT WORKMAN PUBLISHING —
I’m still reeling in happiness that Workman has
taken on this book to help me with my not-sosurreptitious plan to spread some peace and
positivity around the world. Special thanks to
Page for finding this book and bringing it to
Workman; to Maisie for all your hours of work,
staying forever positive, being an amazing
editor, and listening to all my requests; to
Rebecca, Lathea, Moira, and Cindy for getting
the word out in fun and creative ways; to Galen
for all his book layout skills and for appeasing
the many design requests; to Kristina for
getting this book into more and more countries;
to Sun for the super organizational skills; and
to the rest of the team at Workman working
behind the scenes.
EXTRA HELPERS —Dyana, Kevin, and Niina
were so kind as to be early readers and gave
generous feedback on the book. Lucy and Tania
also read through it to dot the “i’s” and cross
the “t’s.” Yoram generously contributed the
feelings and needs table in the appendix. And
Maddie jumped in to do some invaluable quote
research, too. For the Montessori quotes, I was
inundated with help from my Montessori friends
who had fun tracking down all the sources for
Dr. Montessori’s wisdom. Thank you all for your
invaluable help to make this book the best it
could possibly be.

FAMILIES FOR SHARING THEIR
HOMES —I am constantly surprised by the
generosity and kindness of others. When
I reached out to the families whose homes
and children are featured in this book, they
unhesitatingly offered to share their photos and
lives with us. I hope you find their stories and
photos pure inspiration for bringing Montessori
into your own home. Thank you to Anna, Kylie,
Enerel, Beth, and Amy for sharing the beauty,
the joy, and the calm that Montessori has
brought to your families.
MY INSPIRATION —I am eternally grateful for
being introduced to Montessori by these three
wise ladies—Ferne Van Zyl, An Morison, and
Annabel Needs. I was lucky enough to attend
classes with my children and work with Ferne,
getting an amazing introduction to Montessori.
Ferne shared her love for Montessori with me
and showed me how to see things from the
child’s perspective. An and Annabel were my
children’s first Montessori teachers. It was
from attending an open day at Castlecrag
Montessori School in Sydney, Australia, that I
was first touched by the beauty of a Montessori
classroom, the respect of Montessori teachers,
and the care with which everything is prepared
for the children. Thank you for inspiring me to
follow in your footsteps.
MY MONTESSORI TRAINER—Judi Orion
shared her love of babies and toddlers with us
and her wealth of experience during our AMI
Assistants to Infancy training. I soaked up every
word of our training and found the training so
thorough in preparing us for all the work we do
with children. A fundamental part of the training
that I learned from Judi was the power of
observation—learning to see the child with fresh
eyes every day and accepting them for who they
are. Thank you Judi for showing me how to see
in a new way.
MONTESSORI FRIENDS —I have had the
pleasure of learning from many Montessori
friends both in person and online. These
include Heidi Phillipart-Alcock, Jeanne-Marie
Paynel, the lovely folk in the AMI head office,
Eve Hermann and family, Pamela Green and
Andy Lulka, and all the Montessori community
from the Montessori congresses to our online

221

Montessori communities. Thank you for sharing
your wisdom and helping me to keep growing
and learning every day.
FAMILIES AT JACARANDA TREE
MONTESSORI —I feel very grateful to work
with such amazing families who come to my
classes at Jacaranda Tree Montessori here
in Amsterdam. Every week I greet more than
100 children and their mamas, papas, carers,
grandparents, and others. I am learning from
these families every day.
MY MUM + DAD + SISTERS —and all my
extended family. We are a funny, random
bunch. So different from each other in many
ways, but so similar in others. My parents have
always supported me, even when I say, “I think
I’m going to be a Montessori teacher” or “move
16,633 kilometers away.” I love chatting with
them all on Sunday mornings and catching up
on each other’s news. Thank you for giving me
both roots and wings.
LUKE—for dreaming about having kids while
wandering through the market in London that
day and for making it a reality. For working
the night shift and waking up to look after
Oliver and Emma while I did my Montessori
training. For living in the UK, Australia, and the
Netherlands. For all I have learned through 17
years of marriage, through separating amicably,
and through our ongoing co-parenting journey.
I would not have wanted to do it with anyone
else. Thank you for being my intellectual
sparring partner.
MY WORK BUDDY—When we work for
ourselves, it can be hard to find the support we
need. And then one day there was Debbie. She
is not just my weekly work buddy. She listened
to me go through a huge transition, we went on
work retreats in cabins, had nature adventures
with our children, and her family are the best
people to share Sint “surprises” with. Then
we wrote our books side by side at the cafe,
celebrating and supporting each other. She is
always there with a listening ear and just the
right words. Thank you for Thursday afternoon
work sessions and more.

MY FRIENDS —I have friends here in
Amsterdam who hear all the nitty gritty
as we catch up over coffee, stroll around
a museum, or see a film. I have old friends
whom I speak to less often but pick up exactly
where we leave off and seem to be flowing
in the same path even if we aren’t in the same
city. Thank you Rachel, Agi, Michelle, Birgit,
Emily, Becci, Narelle, Emmy, Claire, Monika,
and many others for all the fun to fuel my work.
KICKSTARTER BACKERS —I am indebted
to all the people who backed this book in its
early Kickstarter days, and for trusting me and
helping to get this project off the ground and
into homes all around the world.
ALL THE THINGS —for everything around
me, from the cups of tea, to the nature visits,
to cycling on my bike to class, to my bath, to
yoga in the living room, to cozy spots where
I’ve perched with my laptop to write this book
(cafes, sitting outside, my bed, my kitchen table,
my desk, the couch, a train through France, a
plane to Stockholm, an apartment in Lyon), to
my camera for capturing the beauty around me,
to the internet for allowing me to connect with
so many people, to the inspiring podcasts, to
ALL the books, to Amsterdam which I now call
home. I have so much I am grateful for.
TO YOU—for joining me in this work to spread
peace in the world, one family at a time. Thank
you, thank you, thank you.
MY OWN CHILDREN —Lastly, I want to thank
the most important people in my life, Oliver and
Emma. They are my favorite people to spend
time with. They have taught me so much about
being a parent, and I have loved growing up
alongside them. Their support, patience, and
understanding for my work means so much to
me. Thank you from the bottom of my heart
both for being you and for putting up with me
talking nonstop about this project. Thank you
for the pure love that fills my heart to write this
book.

APPE N D IX

224 Instead of this, say that
226	Where to find Montessori materials and
furniture
228 About Montessori schools
228	What to look for in a Montessori school
229	What does a typical day at a Montessori
school look like?
230	Is Montessori suitable for every child?
231	How does a child transition to a traditional
school after being at Montessori?
232 Feelings and needs
234 Play-dough recipe
235 List of Montessori activities for toddlers

224

I N STE A D O F TH I S , SAY TH AT
TO . . .

INSTEAD OF THIS . . .

SAY THAT . . .

See through our
child’s eyes

Denying:
“Don’t worry about it. It’s just a bump.”

See the situation from their perspective/
acknowledge their feelings:
“Was that a shock? A bump can hurt.”

Judging:
“You are always taking toys from
other children.”

Translate for them:
“It sounds like you would like to have a turn when
they are all finished.”

Blaming, lecturing:
“You shouldn’t have . . .”
“What you should do is . . .”

Seek to understand by guessing how they feel:
“Are you telling me . . .?”
“It looks like you . . .”
“Are you feeling . . . ?”
“It seems like . . .”

Telling them what not to do:
“Don’t drop the glass!”

Tell them how to have success:
“Use two hands.”

Avoid always taking the lead:
“Let’s go take a look at the puzzles.”

Follow the child:
Say nothing (wait to see what they choose).

Help our child

Taking over and doing it for them:
“Let me do it for you . . .”

Step in as little as possible and as much as
necessary:
“Would you like me/someone to help you?”
“Would you like to see how I do it?”
“Have you tried . . . ?”

Help our child
love learning

Correcting:
“No, it’s an elephant.”

Teach by teaching:
“Ah. You wanted to show me the rhinoceros.”
(Then make a note to teach them elephant at
another time.)

Cultivate
curiosity

Giving the answers to all questions:
“The sky is blue because . . .”

Encourage them to find out:
“I don’t know. Let’s find out together.”

Help our child
assess for
themselves, i.e.,
cultivate intrinsic
motivation

Praising:
“Good job!”
“Good boy/girl!”

1. G
 ive feedback, describe effort:
“You put all the trucks in the basket.”
2. S
 um it up with a word: “Now, that’s what I
call being resourceful.”
3. Describe how we feel: “It’s a pleasure to
walk into a tidy room.”

Share

Forcing them to share:
“Give them a turn now.”

Allow them to finish and share by taking turns:
“It looks like they are playing with it
right now. It will be available soon.”

Accept our child
for who they are

Dismissing their angry/big feelings:
“It’s just a spoon. Don’t be silly.”

Acknowledge and allow all feelings:
“It looks like you are upset that your favorite
spoon isn’t available.”

Remind them of
a house/ground
rule

Shouting:
“No fighting!”

Have a few house rules:
“I can’t let you hurt them. Use your words to
tell them what you would like.”

Cultivate
cooperation

Saying no:
“Don’t touch the baby!”

Use positive language:
“We are gentle with the baby.”

Build
independence

225
TO . . .

INSTEAD OF THIS . . .

SAY THAT . . .

Getting involved in the problem:
“You are driving me crazy. Why don’t
you get dressed? We need to leave!”

Find ways to solve the problem:
“How can we find a way to solve the problem?
Let’s make a checklist of all the things we need to
do to leave in the morning.”

Getting frustrated:
“Why don’t you listen to me? It’s bath
time!”

Find ways to involve the child:
“Would you like to hop to the bath like a rabbit or
walk sideways on all fours like a crab?”

Nagging, shouting:
“How many times do I have to ask you
to put your shoes on?”

Use one word: “Shoes.”

Repeating ourselves:
“Don’t go near the oven again!”

Write a note:
“The sign says, ‘It’s hot.’”

Accusing:
“Why don’t you ever put away your toys
when you are finished?”

Show them:
“It goes here” (while tapping the shelf).

Help our child be
responsible

Threatening, punishing, bribing, or
giving a time-out:
“If you do that again, I’ll . . .”
“If you come now, I’ll give you a sticker.”
“Go to time-out to think about what
you have done!”

Help them calm down and then make amends:
“You look upset. Would you like a cuddle?”
“Would you like to go to your calm place to calm
down?”
THEN
“Our friend is crying. How can we make it up to
them?”

Communicate
limits

Avoiding conflict, being very strict,
or setting a bad example:
“They are too young to know what they
are doing.”
“If you bite me again, I’ll bite you and
let you see if you like it.”

Set a kind and clear limit:
“I can’t let you hit/throw/bite me. I’m going to
put you down. If you need to bite, you can bite on
this apple.”

Avoid sibling
rivalry

Comparing siblings:
“Why don’t you eat your peas like your
sister/brother?”

Treat each child uniquely:
“It sounds like you would like some more.”

Putting the eldest in charge:
“You are a big brother/sister now.
You should know better.”

Give all siblings responsibility:
“Can you both look after each other while
I visit the bathroom?”

Be neutral in
sibling disputes

Trying to decide who is right and
wrong:
“What happened here?”

Leave them to solve the problem:
“I see two kids who want the same toy.
I know you can come up with a solution
that both of you are happy with.”

Avoid using roles
and labels

Putting a child in a role or using labels:
“They are the shy one/the clever one.”

Give them another view of themselves:
“I noticed that you asked for help all by yourself.”

Communicate
with family/other
caregivers

Getting angry with a family member:
“Why are you shouting at them?”

Translate for them:
“It sounds like Mom/Dad would like you to . . .”

Model grace and
courtesy

Blaming others:
“You should have told me earlier.”

Take responsibility:
“What I should have done is . . .”
“What I should have said is . . .”

226

W H E R E TO F I N D M O NTE S SO R I M ATE R IA L S
A N D F U R N ITU R E
Sources for materials and furniture will vary from country to country. However, here are
some suggestions of places to get started.
I like to recommend first looking locally where possible to support local businesses and
to reduce our footprint by minimizing shipping costs.
A few things from somewhere like Ikea can be useful for basics, and we can customize
them to add our own unique touch. They have some suitable low shelving, tables and
chairs, arts and crafts materials, book ledges, and items for the hallway, kitchen, and
bathroom.

1. Activities
To find a wide selection of wooden puzzles; sorting, stacking, posting, and threading
activities; and musical instruments, look in wooden-toy shops or secondhand stores.
Coin boxes can be found at stationery shops or specialty lock shops.
Another activity that is easy to set up at home is a basket full of purses with hidden
treasures inside. I love finding these purses at flea markets and thrift stores. Some
favorite hidden treasures to look for are small spinning tops, miniature animals, a small
toy baby, and trinkets found on key chains (with the key chain removed). (As these items
are often small and possible choking hazards, always offer with supervision.)
I also love Schleich plastic animals; they are a bit expensive but great for gifts. They’re
available at wooden-toy shops or online.

2. Craft Supplies
For small scissors; painting supplies; chunky, good-quality pencils; and watercolor
paints, look in an art supply shop. There we can also find paper and paintbrushes in
various sizes.

227

3. Baskets and Trays
Baskets and trays are perfect for organizing the activities on our shelves at home. We can
look in storage supply shops, thrift shops, or department stores. Muji stores also have
some lovely options.

4. Snack Area
Be on the hunt for a kitchen or housewares store that stocks glasses that are the right size
for small hands while being durable and chip resistant. Look for glass, not plastic. We
show the child how to use real objects around the home. If they are aware that the items
may break, they learn to carry these items with care. Drinking from a glass tastes better,
is a more sustainable choice, and doesn’t tip over as easily when our child is learning to
pour a drink for themselves. I use the smallest size of Duralex glasses in my classroom.
We can find nice enamel bowls in housewares shops or small metal bowls at Ikea, as well
as cute tin boxes for crackers in antiques stores or at Ikea.

5. Cleaning
We can also include small cleaning items in our kitchen area, such as a mop, broom,
or dustpan with brush. These are generally available at toy shops or online. Hand
mitts (made of terry cloth to fit over the hand) are useful to have at the ready; look in
department stores. I have found some great toddler-sized aprons on Etsy by searching
“Montessori aprons.”

6. Furniture
We may be able to find a workshop where they can make us a small table, chair, and low
shelves. I also like to look at secondhand shops. The shelves in our class are 47 inches
long by 12 inches deep by 16 inches high (120 cm by 30 cm by 40 cm).

228

A B O UT M O NTE S SO R I SC H O O L S
What to look for in a Montessori school
Because the name Montessori was never copyrighted, there is a wide range of so-called
Montessori schools, and it can be difficult to know which are genuinely applying the
principles and theories of Dr. Montessori.
Here are ten things to look for:
1.	The school promotes hands-on understanding of the world with tangible materials.
The children make discoveries for themselves through touching, exploring, and
working with beautiful, solid materials.
2.	The materials are set out on shelves at the children’s level. The activities are
beautiful, attractively presented on trays or in baskets, with no missing parts.
3.	There are mixed age groups: 3-to-6-year-olds, 6-to-9-year-olds, and 9-to-12-yearolds. The older children can model for, and help, the younger children.
4.	The work time is unstructured. The children are free to choose what they work on
and free to work uninterrupted for (ideally) three-hour periods.
5.	The children are happy and independent.
6.	There is little or no testing. The teacher knows which activities each child has
mastered, so there is little need to test a child.
7.	The teacher has completed a recognized Montessori training program. I particularly
like Association Montessori Internationale, because this is the training organization
Dr. Montessori’s family set up to maintain the integrity of their courses.
8.	The teacher talks respectfully to the children as a guide, encouraging them to be
resourceful about finding answers to their questions: “I don’t know. Let’s find out!”
9.	Natural learning is emphasized over traditional learning. Rather than the teacher
standing at the front of the class telling the children what they need to know, the
children are free to explore and make discoveries for themselves in a natural way.
10.	The school treats each child as a unique individual, while looking at all aspects of
their development (social, emotional, physical, cognitive, and linguistic).

229

What does a typical day at a Montessori school look like?
It can be difficult for parents to understand how there can be thirty children
in a Montessori class, all working on different lessons and on different subjects
simultaneously. I often get asked, “How can the teacher manage all this?”
Here’s an impression of how it works in practice.
Before the day starts, the Montessori teacher has prepared the classroom. Activities
line the shelves at the children’s height in the various subject areas, with meticulously
arranged materials that scaffold onto each other, building skills upon skills upon skills.
During the class, the teacher observes the children, sees what each child is learning and
mastering, and offers the next lesson to a child when they are ready.
If we walk into a Montessori classroom, we might see one child working on their math
skills, another child doing a language activity, and an additional pair of children
completing a project together. The idea is that the child can choose for themselves what
they would like to work on.
In a Montessori classroom, less time is spent on “crowd control,” such as getting
everyone to sit and listen to a lesson or visiting the bathroom as a group. This gives the
teacher more time to focus on observing and helping the children.
Because the children in the classroom are in mixed-age groups, older children can help
younger children. When they explain something to another child, they consolidate their
own learning. The younger children also learn from observing older children.
We might be concerned that, with all this freedom, our child might avoid an area of
learning. If this happens, the Montessori teacher will observe whether the child is not
yet ready, and they can offer them activities that may be more accessible and attractive
to them, showing them in a different way that follows their interests.

230

Is Montessori suitable for every child?
We often wonder if Montessori is suitable for all children or only for children who can
plan well, are very independent, or can sit quietly to work.
1. Does Montessori work for different learning types?

I’ve found that Montessori is suitable for all children. The materials offer opportunities
to learn visually, aurally, kinesthetically (through touch), and verbally, so they appeal to
children who learn in different ways.
Some children learn by observing, others by doing. Children do not have to be “busy”
all the time—they are welcome to observe others doing an activity. Sometimes, they will
have learned so much through observation that by the time they try the same activity
themselves, they are already close to mastering it. Another child may learn more by
doing the activity themselves, repeating and repeating it until they master it. Both
children can thrive in this environment, despite their different learning styles.
2. Does our child have to be able to plan?

Planning their day is something Montessori children learn how to do over time. In
younger age groups, children follow their natural rhythm and interests. As they get
older, they gradually build their planning skills in small steps.
Some children may need more guidance than others. A trained Montessori teacher
should be able to guide children who need more assistance with organizing their work.
3. What if our child needs to move a lot?

A Montessori approach can be ideal for children who need to move. When we enter a
Montessori classroom, it can often seem surprisingly quiet. The children appear focused
on their activities without the teacher having to yell at them to calm down.
However, we also notice that the children are free to move around the classroom,
observe others, and go to the toilet when necessary. In addition, a lot of movement is
built into the activities themselves, so Montessori can be perfect for a child who needs to
move.

231

4. Does Montessori match our parenting approach at home?

Montessori is suitable for all children, but some may find the limits of the classroom too
constraining, and others may find the freedoms of the classroom too permissive.
I believe that Montessori works best when the child experiences a similar approach at
home, where parents respect the child but also set clear limits—and the child learns to
stay within them.

How does a child transition to a traditional school after being at Montessori?
Parents are often concerned that their child may need to switch to a traditional school at
some stage in the future.
It is natural to think, How will my child adjust to having to listen to the teacher giving the
same lesson to everyone? To follow the teacher’s timeline, rather than my child’s? To sit still
during class?
Children generally transition well from Montessori schools to other schools. They are
usually very independent, respectful, and sensitive to the other children—skills that are
useful as they move to a new school.
I’ve heard a child say about the transition, “It’s easy. You just have to do what the teacher
tells you.”
In another case, a child had been in Montessori schools until high school. The biggest
challenges she faced were:
1. Asking the teacher if she could use the toilet
2. Not being able to look up information during tests if she didn’t know the answer,
because she was used to finding out the solution herself
Another family found it amusing that the children in the new school always put up their
hands to ask the teacher if something was on the test. The Montessori children were used
to learning because they loved to do so, not because they were being tested.

232

F E E LI N G S A N D N E E D S
I have learned a lot from the Nonviolent Communication courses run by Yoram Mosenzon
from connecting2life.net. I asked him if I could include his feelings and needs tables in this
book, and he kindly agreed.

PLEASANT
(EXPANSION)
CALM

relaxed
serene
tranquil
peaceful
quiet
at ease
comfortable

UNPLEASANT
(CONSTRICTION)

FEELINGS • SENSATIONS • EMOTIONS

LIVELY

trusting
relieved
centered
content
fulfilled
satisfied
mellow

excited
enthusiastic
eager
energetic
passionate
vibrant
anticipation

blissful
ecstatic
radiant
thrilled
astonished
amazed
optimistic

CONFUSED

BODY SENSATIONS

WORRIED

torn
lost
hesitant
baffled
perplexed
puzzled

pain
tense
shaky
breathless
squeezed

concerned
stressed
nervous
anxious
edgy
unquiet

shrink
sick
weak
empty
choked

UNCOMFORTABLE
FEAR
HAPPY

amused
animated
delighted

COMPASSION

glad
joyful
pleased

CURIOUS

fascinated
interested
involved

engaged
inspired

tender
warm
openhearted
loving
affection
friendly
sympathetic
touched

rested
enlivened
restored
reactivated
clearheaded

appreciative
thankful
moved
encouraged

CONFIDENT

empowered
open
proud
safe
hopeful

NONVIOLENT COMMUNICATION

disturbed
cranky
shocked
surprised
alert
uneasy

fragile
insecure
reserved
sensitive

EMBARRASSED

ashamed
shy

BORED

SAD
VULNERABLE

GRATEFUL
REFRESHED

afraid
scared
suspicious
panicked
paralyzed
terrified
apprehensive

troubled
unsettled
restless
uncertain
disquiet
agitated

heavy hearted
disappointed
discouraged
melancholy
depressed
gloomy

pity
longing
despair
helpless
hopeless
nostalgic

disconnected
alienated
apathetic
cold
numb
withdrawn
impatient

ANGRY
JEALOUS

PAIN

envious

hurt
heartbroken
lonely
miserable
suffer
grief

FATIGUE

overwhelmed
burnout
exhausted
sleepy
tired

agony
devastated
regretful
remorseful
guilt
turmoil

ANNOYED

irritated
frustrated
impatient

displeased
exasperated
unsatisfied

upset
furious
rage
resentful

HATE

dislike
hostile
aversion
bitter
disgusted
scorn

233
How to use these tables: When we have a thought, we can use the “Feelings/Sensations/
Emotions” table to pinpoint what we are actually feeling. Once we’ve identified the feeling,
we can use the table of “Universal Basic Needs” to see which underlying need is not being
met, for example, to be seen or heard. Then, we are able to be more compassionate with
ourselves and communicate more effectively with others about our feelings. We can also turn
this compassion to others and try to understand their feelings and needs.

UNIVERSAL BASIC NEEDS

PHYSICAL
WELL-BEING

air
nourishment (food, water)
light
warmth
rest / sleep
movement / physical
exercise
health
touch
sexual expression
shelter / security /
protection / safety /
protection from pain /
emotional safety /
preservation
comfort

HARMONY

peace
beauty
order
calm / relaxation /
equanimity / tranquility
stability / balance
ease
communion / wholeness
completion / digestion /
integration
predictability / familiarity
equality / justice / fairness

CONNECTION

MEANING

FREEDOM

love
belonging
closeness
intimacy
empathy / compassion
appreciation
acceptance
recognition
reassurance
affection
openness
trust
communication
sharing / exchange
giving / receiving
attention
tenderness / softness
sensitivity / kindness
respect
seeing (see / be seen)
hearing (hear / be heard)
understanding
(understand / be understood)
consideration / care / that my
needs matter
inclusion / participation
support / help / nurturing
cooperation / collaboration
community / companionship /
partnership / fellowship
mutuality / reciprocity
consistency / continuity

purpose
contribution / enrich life
centeredness
hope / faith
clarity
to know (be in reality)
learning
awareness / consciousness
inspiration / creativity
challenge / stimulation
growth / evolution / progress
empowerment / power /
having inner strength /
competence / capacity
self-value / self-confidence /
self-esteem / dignity
efficacy / effectiveness
liberation / transformation
to matter / take part in /
have my place in the world
spirituality
interdependence
simplicity
celebration / mourning

choice / acting out of my
own spirituality
autonomy
independence
space / time

HONESTY

self-expression
authenticity
integrity
transparency
realness / truth

PLAY

liveliness / alive / vitality
flow
passion
spontaneity
fun
humor / laugh / lightness
discovery / adventure
variety / diversity

Note: The words in this list are not “pseudo feelings,” like when we say we are feeling
“attacked.” Pseudo feelings often imply the person receiving our message is at fault. So stick
to words on this list that have been carefully selected so that we will be heard.

234

P L AY- D O U G H R EC I P E

To make the best play dough, you usually have to cook it, which gets very messy. This recipe
uses boiling water instead. We just stir the ingredients, add the boiling water, mix for a few
minutes until it’s cool, then knead. Voilà, we’ve got lovely play dough.

INGREDIENTS (makes about a cup [240 ml] of play dough)
Regular Play Dough
1 cup (125 g) flour
2 tablespoons cream of tartar
1⁄2 cup (150 g) salt
3⁄4 to 1 cup (175 to 250 ml) boiling water
1 tablespoon cooking oil
Food coloring or cinnamon, spirulina powder, or other natural coloring
Chocolate Mud Play Dough
11⁄4 cups (150 g) flour
1⁄2 cup (50 g) cocoa
1 teaspoon cream of tartar
1⁄4 cup (75 g) salt
3⁄4 to 1 cup (175 to 250 ml) boiling water
2 tablespoons cooking oil

INSTRUCTIONS
1. The children can mix the dry ingredients together in a medium bowl.
2. Add the boiling water, food coloring, and oil to dry ingredients and mix until it pulls away
from the edges of the bowl. (This is a step for the adult.)
3. Once the mixture is cool enough (this takes a few minutes), have the children knead it
until it’s smooth.
4. Store in sealed container for up to 6 months. Does not need to be refrigerated.

LI ST O F
M O NTE S SO R I
AC TIVITI E S FO R
TO D D LE R S

236
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

All ages

Music/dance/
movement/singing

• Playing musical instruments
• Listening to beautiful music (preferably not as
background music but as the focus)
• Dancing and moving to explore and stretch the body
• Singing

• Music and movement

All ages

Books

• Collection of books with realistic images that
relate to the life a young child is living
• One picture per page for infant, then one picture
with one word, then a picture with a sentence, then
build to simple stories, and then more complex
stories
• Arranged so that children can see their covers and
access them easily, perhaps in a small basket for a
few books or on a small bookshelf
• Start with board books and move on to hardcover
and paperback

• Language

All ages

Rhythmic
language

•
•
•
•

Poetry, songs, rhyming ditties
Simple and not too long
Fairly realistic
Finger and body movements that go along with
them. Examples: action rhymes, finger rhymes,
haiku, pat-a-cake

• Language

All ages

Self-expression

• Moments during the day when the child wants to
share something with the adult
• For a nonverbal child, it can be sounds,
expressions, or poking out their tongue.
• A verbal child will use words, then phrases and
sentences.
• The adult needs to get down to the child’s
eye level, maintain eye contact (if culturally
appropriate), and be present.
• We can restate what they have said.
• Through body language and speech, the adult lets
the child know that we are very interested in what
they are sharing.

• Language

12 months

Scribbling

• Block crayon or chunky pencil (like Stabilo 3 in 1 )
• Paper—different sizes, colors, textures
• Underlay to protect entire table, or a place mat

• Art/self-expression

12 months

Easel-chalk

• Chalkboard—examples:
1. o
 n the other side of a painting easel;
2. v ery large piece of plywood with chalkboard
paint, wall mounted low to ground; and/or
3. small chalkboard that sits on a shelf
• Chalk—start with white and gradually introduce
colors and different types of chalk
• Small eraser

• Art/self-expression

Able to
stand
unaided

Easel-paint

• Easel
• Paper that completely covers surface of easel
• Start with one color of thick paint in a cup and
gradually introduce other colors one by one.
Can use two or more colors for an older child.
• Chunky paintbrush with short handle
• Painting smock/apron
• Cup hook to hang smock/apron
• Paper rolled in bin
• Wet cloth to wipe up spills

• Art/self-expression

237
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

12+ months

Base with rings
of dimensional
gradation

• Base with spindle and four or five rings of varying
gradation, ideally alternating colors
• Bottom ring should not be bigger than child’s hand
span.

• Activities for eye-hand
coordination

12+ months

Nuts and bolts

• One- or two-shaped bolts with a corresponding
nut of the same shape
• Have the nut on the bolt to start

• Activities for eye-hand
coordination

12+ months

Opening and
closing

• Basket with two or three common household
objects for opening and closing, for example,
a decorative box, tin, purse with snap fastener,
makeup containers, toothbrush holder

• Activities for eye-hand
coordination

12+ months

Vocabulary
objects

• Three to six real or replica objects from the same
category
• Examples: fruits, vegetables, clothing, zoo animals,
farm animals, pets, insects, mammals, birds,
vertebrates, invertebrates, and so on

• Aids language
development
• Expands vocabulary

12+ months

Peg box

• Wooden box with six holes along back and an inset
tray area for placing pegs removed from holes

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp

12+ months

Cubes on a
vertical dowel

• Base with three cubes on dowel—keep cubes in
basket or on dowel
• Preparation for bead stringing

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp

12–14+
months

Puzzles

• Collection of knobbed puzzles progressing
through greater and greater degrees of difficulty
• Subject matter depicted on puzzle needs to be
realistic and appealing, for example, animals or
construction vehicles.

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
pincer grasp
• Develops the ability
to recognize a
background shape

Around
13+ months

Locks and keys

• Lock with the key strongly attached to a string

• Activities for eye-hand
coordination

Once a child
can walk

Table wiping

• Tray or basket with a sponge/drying mitt
• Replacement sponges/mitts

• Care of environment

14+ months

Objects with
identical cards for
matching

• Classified sets of objects that have matching cards
• Pictures that are identical to objects—in size and
color, if possible—where the object can be put on
top so that it covers the picture completely

• Aids language
development
• Helps a child move
from 3D object to a 2D
representation

14+ months

Objects with
similar cards for
matching

• Classified sets of objects that have matching cards
• Similar pictures of the objects, perhaps different in
color, size, or other

• Aids language
development
• With similar cards,
allows the child to
extract the essence of
the object

14+ months

Wooden box with
sliding lid

• Box with sliding lid, object inside, changed
regularly

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp

14+ months

Box with bins

• Wooden box with three bins that open out
• Three different objects, placed in each bin

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• To exercise the wrist
motion

238
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

14+ months

Posting activities

• Boxes for posting different shapes and sizes
• Basic set with a single shape, for example, one lid
with a circle, one with a square, one with a triangle,
and one with a rectangle
• Make it more challenging—for example, two
shapes cut out of one lid—and then even more
challenging—for example, with four shapes

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• Introduction to, and
naming of, geometric
solids

14+ months,
walking
steadily

Watering plants

•
•
•
•

• Care of environment

14+ months

Undressing,
dressing, and
storing clothes

• Putting on and taking off their own coat, shoes,
and clothing and hanging them on a hook or
putting the items in a basket

• Care of self

14+ months

Handwashing at
sink

• Bar of soap or liquid soap
• Towel

• Care of self

14+ months

Wiping nose

•
•
•
•

Tissues—can be cut in half and folded
Mirror
Small trash can with swinging lid
Show them how you wipe your own nose; then
allow them to wipe their nose.

• Care of self

14+ months

Brushing teeth

•
•
•
•
•

Bathroom sink
Place to store toothbrush
Toothbrush
Toothpaste
Allow child to start brushing their teeth;
then, offer to finish for them.

• Care of self

14+ months

Dressing frame:
Velcro

• Wooden frame, two pieces of fabric fastened with
Velcro
• To practice opening and closing Velcro

• Care of self

14–16
months

Climbing

• For example, dome climbers, poles, climbing wall,
obstacle courses, trees

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Pushing/pulling

• For example, a wheelbarrow for pushing and a
wagon for pulling

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Brachiating—
swinging by arms
like a monkey

• For example, monkey bars, rings

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Sliding

• Ideally with large platform at top and wide enough
for them to manage independently

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Running

• For example, running tracks with arrows; a basket
of balls sits at each end of the track and the child
carries a ball from basket to basket

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Jumping

• For example, jumping over a line flat on the floor;
once child is jumping with both feet, you can
introduce something with elevation

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Riding

• For example, a balance bike or low trike propelled
by pushing feet on floor; then from 2.5 years,
you can introduce pedal tricycles

• Activities for grossmotor movement

Tray (to protect shelf)
Small watering can
Small container with small piece of dish sponge
Plant

239
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

14–16
months

Balancing

• Balance beam, for example, a plank of wood on top
of some books or bricks
• Initially walking sideways while holding on to
wall/beam in front of them; then walking forward
on beam holding on to wall with one hand; then
one foot on beam, one foot on ground (and then
alternate feet so other foot is on beam and so
forth); then can alter height or move beam away
from wall; can also crawl on a wide balance beam

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Swinging

• Ideally, low to ground so child can get on and off
by themselves and push themselves. Child can lie
over seat and push with feet or sit on seat, back up,
then lift feet and go.

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Other movement
possibilities

• Platform on semicircular base (aka therapy top or
balance board)—very good for building balance,
understanding feedback given by the body, and
coordinating movement
• Y-shaped tunnels made of natural elements like
willow branches or similar
• Labyrinths from box hedge
• Sand pits
• Ball or tire swing
• Gardening and composting
• Cave made out of natural elements, for example,
sticks, willow, or similar
• Running water

• Activities for grossmotor movement

14–16
months

Discs on
horizontal dowel

• Straight, horizontal metal dowel on a wooden base
with one to three discs

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• To cross the midline
• To work on wrist
movements

14–16+
months

Discs on
serpentine dowel

• Serpentine dowel made of metal on a wooden base
with one to three discs

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• To cross the midline
• To work on wrist
movements

Around
15–16+
months

Washing leaves

• Little (leaf-shaped) dish with sponge cut to size
inside dish
• Tray to protect shelf from water

• Care of environment

Around
15–18+
months

Latches

• Collection of latches attached to different
furniture or doorways in a room, for example, latch
with chain, hook latch, and bar latch

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp

Around
15–18+
months

Hair brushing

• Mirror plus hairbrush
• Tray to carry hairbrush and a dish with hair clips
and bands

• Care of self

Around
15–18+
months

Three pegs with
small rings

• Wooden square base with three pegs in primary
colors
• Three rings of each color

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp

240
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

Around
16 to 18+
months

Clay

• Plastic mat or special table with canvas covering
for clay work
• Lump of real mud clay (white/terra-cotta) wrapped
in a damp cloth in a container or white DAS clay or
play dough or kinetic sand
• Tools to sculpt and cut with

• Art/self-expression

16–18+
months

Sweeping

• Broom
• A sweeping guide (or a circle drawn in chalk on
the ground) can be used to show where to collect
the dirt
• Dustpan and brush

• Care of environment

16–18+
months

Dusting

• Dusting cloth

• Care of environment

16–18+
months

Mopping

• Child-sized mop or flat mop with washcloth
attached
• Hang mop on cleaning stand

• Care of environment

16–18+
months

Dusting plants

• Handmade plant duster made of wool
• Container to hold duster

• Care of environment

16–18+
months

Dressing frame:
zipper

• Wooden frame, two pieces of fabric fastened with
a zipper
• The fabric does not come apart—the zipper is
attached at the bottom.
• Metal ring can be placed on the zipper pull.
• Practice using a zipper

• Care of self

16–18+
months

Bead stringing

• Piece of plastic tubing used as thread—easier to
use initially because it allows the child to push a bit
of thread through the bead
• Five or six wooden beads—can build to more beads
• More challenging: thicker string, bigger beads, a
shoelace with small beads

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• Two hands working
together

18+ months

Flower arranging

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

• Care of environment

18+ months

Hanging up cloths

• Wet items of laundry—napkins, hand mitts,
washcloths, aprons
• Clothesline
• Clothespins

• Care of environment

18+ months

Collecting debris
and placing it on
the compost pile/
in the compost bin

•
•
•
•

• Care of environment
• Outdoor environment

Collection of different vases
Doilies
Flowers—cut to length to be used
Tray with a lip
Small jug
Small funnel
Sponge
The child can pour water into the vase using
the funnel, place the flower in the vase, and
arrange the vase on a table or shelf with the doily
underneath.

Debris
Child-sized rake, dustpan, and brush
Wheelbarrow
Compost pile/compost bin

241
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

18+ months

Germinating
seeds

• Seeds—Use a small glass jar with a picture of the
type of plant on the outside. Choose seeds that
will germinate quickly (peas, beans, corn, radishes,
pumpkins, sunflowers).
• Small pots made of clay, newspaper, or peat
• Small gardening hand tools, including trowel and rake
• Apron
• Small tray with a little dish
• Small gardening tray and jug on windowsill or near
light source
• Dirt from outside or, if necessary, a bag of dirt

• Care of environment

18+ months

Other activities
to take care of
the outdoor
environment

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Sweeping
Raking
Digging
Scrubbing tiles, tables, and benches
Watering plants
Picking and caring for flowers
Planting a flower/vegetable/herb garden that then
requires ongoing care

• Care of environment

18+ months
(able to
carry a jug)

Handwashing at
table

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Small basin for washing hands
Jug
Soap dish with small piece of soap
Apron
Washcloth for drying hands
Mitt to dry table
Discard bucket for the dirty water
Suitable for child wanting to repeat handwashing
at sink

• Care of self

18+ months

Cleaning shoes

• Mat
• Brush with handle, or nail brush

• Care of self

18+ months

Setting table

•
•
•
•

• Food preparation

18+ months

Help to clear table

• Wipe face with warm washcloth
• Bring plate and cutlery to kitchen

• Food preparation

18+ months

Preparing
crackers

• Small spreaders
• Small container of butter, nut spread, hummus, or
similar
• Small box of crackers
• Child spreads a small amount of spread onto
cracker and sits to eat.
• Can prepare standing or sitting

• Food preparation

18+ months

Squeezing orange
juice

• Citrus press or squeezer—look for one that the
child can use independently
• Jug to collect juice
• Glass for drinking
• Child can squeeze orange and bring peel to
(compost) bin or trash can

• Food preparation

18+ months

Cutting banana

• Banana prepared by cutting a slit at the top so
child can peel off skin, strip by strip
• Chopping board
• Butter knife/nonserrated knife to cut banana
• Child can bring peel to (compost) bin or trash can
• Child can place in bowl to serve on table

• Food preparation

Help set table with a basket for cutlery
Help lay tablecloth
Help fold napkins
Help make warm washcloths

242
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

18+ months

Peeling and
cutting apple

•
•
•
•

Peeler
Apple cutter/corer
Cutting board
Child can peel apple by laying it on the board and
peeling from top to bottom.
• The apple cutter is pushed from top to bottom
to divide the apple into eight segments and to
remove the core.
• Child can place in bowl to serve on table.

• Food preparation

18+ months

Pour a glass of
water

• Access to a tap/small jug/water dispenser
• Glass
• Have a sponge and hand mitt ready for spills

• Food preparation

18+ months

Watercolor
painting

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Tray
Watercolor tablet
Small jar with water
Brush
Cloth to wipe up spills
Underlay
Paper
Show child how to wet brush, put paint on brush,
paint onto paper.

• Art/self-expression

18+ months

Sorting objects

• Dish with three sections and two different kinds
of the same item, such as shells, nuts, seed pods,
geometric shapes—four of each kind

• Works with refinement
of tactile sense
• Aids in classifying
abilities

18+ months

Vocabulary cards

• Sets of classified cards that relate to the child’s life
• Start with simple classifications

• Aids language
development
• To increase vocabulary

18–22+
months

Dressing frame:
buttons

• Wooden frame, two pieces of fabric attached with
three large buttons
• Vertical buttonhole
• To practice buttoning

• Care of self

18–22+
months

Dressing frame:
snap fasteners

• Wooden frame, two pieces of fabric with snap
fasteners

• Care of self

18–22+
months

Table washing

• Tray with bowl, soap, brush, and sponge for
scrubbing table

• Care of environment

18 months–
2+ years

Mirror polishing

•
•
•
•

Little container of nontoxic mirror polish
Rectangular sponge as an applicator
Finger mitt
Underlay to place items on

• Care of environment

18 months–
2+ years

Wood polishing

•
•
•
•
•

Container that is easy for the child to handle
Bottle of nontoxic polish, such as beeswax
Small dish
Finger mitt
Items to polish

• Care of environment

18 months–
2+ years

Gluing

• Gluing box with space for brush, glue pot with
small amount of glue, up to six large shapes, and
paper to glue onto

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• To teach the practical
skill of gluing
• Refine movement of
fingers
• Art/self-expression

243
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

Around
2+ years

Washing dishes

• Table with two tubs
• Dish brush with small handle, or small sponge
• Travel-sized bottle of dishwashing detergent with
small amount of liquid
• Jug—plastic and transparent; can put mark on jug
to show desired water level
• Apron
• Drying mitt
• Hand-drying cloth

• Food preparation

Around
2+ years

Drying dishes

• Lay the drying cloth on the table, place bowl or
glass on cloth; fold cloth into the bowl or glass;
press; unfold.

• Food preparation

Around
2+ years

Cleaning windows

• Spray bottle with 1 cup (240 ml) of water
(vinegar optional)
• Small squeegee
• Piece of chamois or cloth

• Care of environment

Around
2+ years

Washing cloths

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

• Care of environment

Around
2+ years

Use of scissors

• Pair of small scissors in a case
• Handmade envelopes
• Narrow strips of index card, slim enough to allow
the child to cut across the strip in one snip

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• To learn practical skill
of cutting
• To develop precise
hand movements

Around
2+ years

Classified
sterognostic bags
(mystery bags)

• Attractive bag with five to eight related, unrelated,
or paired objects
• Bag you can’t easily look into, so child feels around
the object
• Examples:
1. C
 ooking implements—child-sized spreader,
cookie cutter, sieve, bamboo whisk, spatula
2. B
 ag of items from another country, such as a
bag made out of a kimono containing Japanese
items
3. Hair items
4. Gardening tools

• To aid in the
development of the
stereognostic sense
• To increase vocabulary

Around
2 years—
the child
needs some
spoken
language

Questioning
exercise

• Conversations that can occur throughout the day,
such as while folding laundry or preparing food
• Example: “Do you remember when we planted the
basil and then it started growing?” “Where did we
plant the basil seeds?” “What did we use to pick
the basil?”
• Done very naturally and conversationally

• To use vocabulary they
are developing
• To broaden child’s
thinking, help them
abstract information
from their experiences,
and verbalize it
• Builds self-confidence
• Allows the adult to
model language usage

Table with two tubs
Small scrub board
Bar of soap
Soap dish
Jug
Two plastic baskets on either side of table on floor
Apron
Drying mitt
Hand-drying cloth

244
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

2+ years

Sewing

• In a basket or box
- Scissors
- Thread
- Needle case with blunt tapestry or embroidery
needle
- First sewing card consists of a punched diagonal
line on a square card; progress to holes in square
and circle shapes; then to embroidery or sewing
buttons.

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp
• To learn the practical
skill of sewing
• To practice precision
and exactness

2+ years

Grading sizes of
nuts and bolts

• Wooden board with various-sized holes
• Nuts and bolts that fit into the holes in a container

• Eye-hand coordination

2+ years

Stretching elastic
bands on a grid
board

• Using a geoboard to stretch elastics—can create
patterns or keep it open-ended

• Eye-hand coordination

2.5 years

Polishing shoes

• Container to hold
1. s hoe polish (small amount)
2. fi
 nger mitt for applying polish
3. soft-bristled brush
• Underlay that covers the whole table
• Shoe horn, if outdoor shoes are worn

• Care of self

2.5+ years

Dressing frame:
buckles

• Wooden frame, two pieces of leather fastened
with three or four buckles
• To practice buckles

• Care of self

2.5+ years

Helping with
baking

• Help measure ingredients
• Stir ingredients
• Sweep and clean up after baking

• Food preparation

3+ years

Help unpack
dishwasher

• Assist in emptying the dishwasher

• Daily life

3+ years

Help with
recycling

• Sort recycling and bring it to container

• Daily life

3+ years

Make bed (pulling
up a duvet)

• Make their own bed—duvet only

• Daily life

3+ years

Use toilet
independently

• Have a step stool and a smaller toilet seat available
or use a potty

• Daily life

3+ years

Assisting with
more advanced
cooking

• For example, helping to make lasagna

• Food preparation

3+ years

Feeding pets

• A small amount of fish food can be placed in an
egg cup.
• Getting water for dog
• Giving food to cat, hamster, or other pet

• Daily life

3+ years

Help with folding
laundry and socks

• Take part in the clothes-washing process
• Invite child to sort items by person or color, pair
socks, learn basic folding skills, and so on.

• Daily life

3+ years

Helping to get
ready for visitors

• Making beds
• Clearing spaces, picking up toys, and so on
• Preparing meal

• Daily life

3+ years

First board games

•
•
•
•

• Turn taking
• Understanding simple
rules
• Fun

Orchard by HABA
Shopping list and other games by Orchard Toys
Simple card games, such as Snap
Games can be simplified, depending on the age of
the child.

245
AGE

ACTIVITY NAME

DESCRIPTION/MATERIALS

AREA OF
DEVELOPMENT

3+ years

More difficult
sewing, arts and
crafts materials

•
•
•
•
•

• Art/self-expression

3+ years

Exploration of
world around us

• For example, nature collections, birds, animals,
plants, and trees

• Botany
• Cultural studies
• Life sciences

3+ years

More refined
threading, sorting

• Shoelace with small beads
• Piece of wool with small pieces of straw, using an
embroidery needle

• Eye-hand coordination
• Refining the grasp

3+ years

Composition
puzzles—twelve
or more pieces

• More difficult puzzles, including layered puzzles,
composition puzzles, and puzzles with more pieces

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
pincer grasp
• Develops the ability
to recognize a
background shape

3+ years

Hammering
shapes in
corkboard

• Corkboard
• Wooden shapes
• Small nails and hammer

• Eye-hand coordination

3+ years

Pinprick work

•
•
•
•

• Refinement of eyehand coordination and
grasp

3+ years

I spy

• If showing interest in sounds of letters, use
phonetic sounds of letters.

• Language
development
• Prereading skills

3+ years

Calendar

• Make your own or buy a simple calendar in which
the child can change the day, month, and weather.
• Can add more details as the child gets older

• Time

3+ years

Lots of free play
and outdoor play

• Allow time every day for the child to be outdoors
and to have unstructured time to play.

• Daily life
• Outdoor environment
• Fun

3+ years

WEDGiTS

• WEDGiTS can be purchased; they allow building in
sequence, and various patterns can be made.

• This is not a Montessori
activity but would be
suitable for the home
environment.

3+ years

Well-selected
building materials

• For example, Lego, Magna-Tiles, wooden blocks

• These are not
Montessori activities
but would be
suitable for the home
environment.

3+ years

Marble run

• There are beautiful wooden marble runs that
children can build themselves.

• This is not a Montessori
activity but would be
suitable for the home
environment.

Cards with more complicated shapes, like a heart
Sewing buttons
Sewing embroidery patterns
Sewing a cushion
Art projects with more than one step

Shape drawn on paper to prick
Felt underlay
Pricking pen
The child follows along the line until the shape can
be removed.

246

INDEX

A

B

absorbent mind, 4, 18
acceptance, 99–105
actions rather than words,
116
activities
by age, 42–43, 236–245
arts and crafts, 24, 44–45,
56–57, 61
characteristics of, 25–26
eye-hand coordination, 24,
34–37, 50–51
language, 24, 46–49, 58–59
materials for, 25, 226
music and movement, 24,
37–38, 52–53, 60–61
outdoors, 52–53, 60–61, 71,
83
practical life, 24, 39–43,
54–55
presentation of, 26–27
principles for, 27–30
purpose of, 24
setting up, 31–33
adult, preparation of, 179
adult relationships, 195
age-appropriate choices,
113
age-appropriate
consequences, 123
age-appropriate expectations,
116–117
agreement, getting child’s,
114
apologizing, 5, 93
arts and crafts, 24, 44–45,
56–57, 70, 81, 226–227

baking, 39, 43, 54–55
balance bike, 52–53
balls, 52–53
base, safe and secure, 87
bathroom, 70. See also
toileting
bedroom, 69
belonging, 99–100, 105
bilingualism, 173–174
birthdays, 138
biting, 165–167
books, 48–49, 58–59
bribes, 108–109
brushing teeth, 150

C
calm, helping child to,
127–129
calm spaces, 127–128
cards. See language cards
caregivers, 199–200
chalk and eraser, 44, 56–57
changes, dealing with, 151–160
checklists, 111–112
choices, age-appropriate, 113
clay, 44, 56–57
cleaning, 39, 42–43, 54–55, 227
clinginess, 170–171
clothing, 139. See also getting
dressed
clutter, 73
communication, 102–103,
113–116, 119, 224–225.
See also language and
language activities

concentration, building,
168–169
conflict within family,
200–201
consequences, logical, 123
consistency, 6, 131–132
conversations, 49
cooperation, 108–119
creativity, 94–95
curiosity, encouraging, 86–98,
105

D
daily care, 136–150
daily rhythm, 117, 136, 180–181
development, four planes of,
205–208
divorce, 201–202
dressing, 40, 42–43, 139–142

E
eating, 39, 143–146. See also
food preparation
eating area, 69, 144
education system, 209
emotional bucket, 183–184
empathy, giving.
See perspective,
seeing child’s
entrance, 67, 78–79
environment, 13, 14, 87
expectations, managing,
116–117, 119
eye-hand coordination
activities, 24, 34–37, 50–51

247

F
family, working together with,
194–200
feedback, 102–103
feelings
acknowledging, 122, 156–157,
163
acknowledging negative,
125–126
allowing, 101
needs and, 232–233
fighting with siblings,
158–159
flower arranging, 54–55
following the child, 88–89
food preparation, 39, 42–43,
54–55. See also eating
freedom, 6, 18–19, 26
frustration, dealing with,
169
furniture, 67–72, 227
starter set, 72

G
gardening, 60
getting dressed, 40, 42–43,
139–142
gluing, 44, 56–57
going slow, 91, 184–185
grandparents, 199–200
ground rules, setting, 121–122
guide, being child’s, 132, 186

H
hands-on learning, 15–16
help
asking for, 115
offering, 93
hitting, 165–167
holidays, 138
home as helper, 74, 187

home tours, 78–83, 212–217
honesty, modeling, 188
house rules, setting, 121–122
humor, 115–116

M

imagination, 94
independence, 19, 92, 142,
204
individual development, 20
information, providing, 113
interrupting an adult, 162–163
introverted toddlers, 163–164
involving children, 90–91, 113,
119

making amends, 128, 130
manners and courtesies, 17
materials, 25, 226–227
mealtimes, 39, 143–146
mistakes, 93, 189
Montessori education
introduction to, 12–14
principles of, 14–21
Montessori, Dr. Maria, 12
movement acquisition, 17, 60
music and movement
activities, 24, 37–38,
52–53
music box, 52–53
mystery bags, 50–51

K

N

kinetic sand, 44, 56–57
kitchen, 55, 68, 82

nature, 60–61. See also
outdoors
needs, feelings and, 232–233
night waking, 148–149
non-Montessori toys, 62
notes, 118
nuts and bolts, 35, 50–51

I

L
labels, 104–105
language and language
activities, 17, 24, 46–49,
58–59, 173–174. See also
communication
language cards, 46, 58–59
laughing
after hitting/biting/pushing,
167
at limits, 124
laundry, 40, 42–43
learning
hands-on, 15–16, 89–90
natural desire for, 15
learning mind-set (parents),
180
leaving the house, 139–142
limits, 6–7, 18–19, 120–133
living room, 67

O
objects, real. See language
cards
observation, 20, 96–97, 105,
183
open-ended play, 62
opening and closing activities,
35, 50–51
order, sensitive period for, 17
outdoors, 52–53, 60–61, 71, 83

P
pacifiers, 154–155
parent, favoring one, 195–196

248
peg puzzle, 50–51
pegboard and elastic bands,
35, 50–51
pet care, 39, 43
perspective, seeing child’s,
99–100, 125, 128, 157–158,
163, 171, 183, 198, 200, 210
physical self-care (parents),
179
plant care, 39
play dough, 44, 56–57, 234
positive language, 114
posting activities, 35, 50–51
practical life activities, 24,
39–43, 54–55
praise, 102–103
preschool, preparing for, 204
presence, practicing, 182
problem solving, 110–111, 119
processing time, 117
punishments, 108–109
pushing, 165–167
puzzles, 36–37, 50–51

R
reading place, 71
real objects. See language
cards
replica objects, 46, 58–59
respect, 20
respectful tone and attitude,
115
responsibility, 19, 120, 128, 130,
188–189
rituals, 138–139
roles, 104–105

S
safety, 124
saying “yes,” 115
scaffolding skills, 92

school
Montessori, 228–231
preparing for, 204
scissors, 44, 56–57
screen time, 172–173
scribbling, 56–57
self-awareness, 190–191
self-care (parents), 40, 42–43,
54–55, 80, 179
self-expression, 49
sensitive periods, 16–17
sensorial exploration, 17
separation from parent,
practicing, 197, 204
sewing, 45, 56–57
sharing, 161–162
sharing spaces, 75
siblings, 155–160
silence, 49
sleep crutches, 148–149
sleeping, 147–149
slide, 52–53
slowing down. See go slow
small spaces, 75–76
snack time, 39, 42–43, 227
social skills, practicing, 204
sorting, 36, 50–51
spaces, setting up
example of, 78–83
principles for, 73–76
room by room, 67–71
starter set, 72
tips for, 66
sportscasting, 125
stereognostic bags, 36
supermarket trips, 40

T
table setting, 54–55
tantrums, dealing with, 126–128
threading activities, 34, 50–51
threats, 108–109

three-period lessons, 47
throwing, 165–167
throwing food, 146
time, allowing enough,
87, 92–93
timers, 114
tiny detail, sensitive period
for, 17
toddlers, description of, 4–7, 9
toileting, 151–154
translating, 100
treasure hunts, 61
trust, 86, 105

V
visitors, preparing for, 40
vocabulary baskets, 46, 48
volunteer work, 40

W
waiting, 117
water activities, 61
watercolor painting, 44, 56–57
window cleaning, 54–55
wonder, sense of, 88
working together, 194–202

Y
“yes,” saying, 115
“yes” spaces, 74–75

